Medium voltage products
Technical guide
The MV/LV transformer substations 
(passive users)
1
2 1. The MV/LV transformer substations 
2  1.1 Introduction
 
2 1.2  Reference standard and documentation 
3 1.3  Traditional definitions and types 
4 2.  Design and construction specifications of the 
substation  
4 2.1 Connection of the substation 
5 2.2 Structure of the substation 
6 2.3 Construction solutions  
7 2.4 Main requirements 
9 2.5 Characteristics of the structure 
9    Structural specifications 
9        Specifications for seismic action 
13        Specifications for fire action 
14 2.6 Thermal sizing and ventilation 
15 2.7 Artificial lighting 
15 2.8 Electrical cables in the substation: position, entry 
points and 
  separation of the circuits 
16 2.9 Earthing systems 
18 2.10 Earthing devices required by the
     connection 
19 2.11 Rating plates, warnings and diagrams 
22 3.  Schematic diagrams of the connection 
23 4.  Sizing and choice of the 
  switchgear and components 
23 4.1 Disconnectors, switch-disconnectors, 
  multifunction devices 
26 4.2 Circuit-breakers 
27 4.3 Measuring and protection  transformers 
27       Inductive transformers 
        (TA-I, TA-T, TO, TV-I)
27      Inductive current transformers 
        (TA-I, TA-T, TO)
30       Inductive voltage transformers (TV-I) 
31       Non-inductive current and voltage sensors 
        (TA-NI, TV-NI) 
32 5.  Protection relays 
37 6.  Diagram of user system for connection and 
MV switchgear 
37 6.1 Diagram of the user installation 
40 6.2 MV switchgear solutions 
42 7.  Power transformers 
48 7.1 Main characteristics 
46 7.2 Choice of transformers based on 
  energy losses and efficiency 
46 7.3 Efficiency requirements and classes for 
transformers 
49 7.4 Selection criteria for transformers based 
  on capitalization of the losses 
49 7.5 Example of a transformer for a transformation 
     substation 
51 7.6 Level of noise in the transformers 
51 7.7 Losses in the substation 
52 8.  LV Switchgear and Systems 
52 8.1 Connection of the transformer and the LV 
switchgear 
52 8.2 LV switchgear 
54 9.  Prefabricated substations 
56 10.  Other requirements of the substation electrical 
system 
56 10.1 Overvoltages 
56 10.2 Harmonics and electrical and magnetic fields 
59 11.  Request for connection 
60 12.  Inspections and tests in situ prior to putting 
into service 
61 13.  Maintenance of the electrical substation
65 14.  Example of substation design - electrical part 
65 14.1 Estimate of the power supplied to a 
     small industrial factory 
67 14.2 Calculation of short circuit and coordination 
     of the protections 
67     Theory behind calculation of the 
  short circuit current 
71      Sizing the electrical installation 
        and coordination of the protections 
80 15.  Conclusion of the example and selection of 
the switchgear: the ABB offer 
Contents
2
CEI 0-16 EMC legislation
Standards 
and product 
guidelines for 
switchgear and 
components
Legislation for 
the prevention 
of accidents in 
the workplace
System 
standards for 
activity and 
maintenance
Fire Prevention 
legislation
Legislation for 
construction 
products
CEI EN 61936-1 CEI EN 50522
1.  Medium voltage/low voltage (MV/LV) 
transformer substations
1.1 Introduction
The subject of this Technical Guide is MV/LV substations; 
in accordance with the reference standard, the discussion 
will be limited to substations with installed power limited to 
2000 kVA or two 1000 kVA MV/LV transformers. 
The purpose of this guide is to give an overview of the 
guidelines and requirements specified by current regulations 
for the design and construction of substations in order 
to guide the designer and the user to the correct system 
choices.
The document will only touch on a few topics such as the 
thee sizing of the earthing system and the building aspects, 
for further details on which you are referred to the specific 
regulations. 
Lastly, the document does not deal with issues related to 
active Users, in other words those that produce alternating 
current electricity with parallel operation (even  temporary) 
with the network.
1.2 Reference standard and 
documentation 
The general picture providing an overview of the key reference 
regulations relating to the design and construction of a MV/LV 
substation is shown in the following figure.
As you can see, the overview is complex, but on the other 
hand the MV/LV electrical substation is the synthesis of 
several design activities (electrical, mechanical, construction, 
installation, etc.) and it is therefore also necessary to consider 
fire prevention laws on safety and construction materials in 
order to obtain a workmanlike result. 
3
A non-exhaustive list is provided below of the main Reference 
Standards used in the drawing up of this Technical Guide.
– CEI TS 62271-210: High-voltage switchgear and 
controlgear - Part 210: Seismic qualification for metal 
enclosed and solid-insulation enclosed switchgear and 
controlgear assemblies for rated voltages above 1 kV and 
up to and including 52 kV
– CEI 99-4: Customer/End user guide to creating MV/LV 
electrical substations
– CEI EN 61936-1: CEI classification: 99-2, Power 
installations exceeding 1 kV a.c. – Part 1: Common rules
– CEI EN 50522: CEI classification:99-3, Earthing of electrical 
installations with voltage greater than 1 kV AC
– CEI EN 62271-1: High voltage switchgear and controlgear, 
Part 1: Common specifications
– CEI EN 62271-200: AC metal-enclosed switchgear and 
controlgear for rated voltages above 1 kV and up to and 
including 52 kV
– CEI EN 62271-202: High-voltage/low-voltage prefabricated 
substation
– CEI EN 50532: Compact switchgear assembly for 
distribution stations
– CEI 11 – 17 and variant V1: Systems for generation, 
transmission and public distribution of electrical energy. 
Cable line;
– CEI 64-8: User electrical installations with rated voltage not 
greater than 1000 V AC and 1500 V DC;
– Guide CEI 11 - 37: Guide for the implementation of earthing 
systems in user energy systems powered at a voltage 
greater than 1 kV.
– CEI 64-12, Guide for the implementation of the earthing 
system in buildings for residential use and in the service 
sector
– CEI EN 50272-2: Safety requirements for accumulator 
batteries and their installations, Part 2: Stationary batteries
– DK 5600 ed.IV -March 2004: Criteria for the connection of 
customers to the MV distribution network
Please note that the Law no.186 of 1 March 1968 and 
Ministerial Decree no.37 of 22 January 2008, updated by 
the Decree of 19 July 2010, assigned a legal role to CEI 
standards. Indeed, Article 2 of the Law and Article 6 of the 
Decree state that the installations must be constructed in 
a workmanlike manner, and that this goal can be achieve 
through compliance with CEI standards.
1.3 Traditional definitions and 
types
An electrical substation is a part of the electrical installation 
that includes the terminations of the transmission or 
distribution lines and switchgear, and which may also include 
transformers The substation also typically includes all the 
necessary devices for control and protection. Depending on 
the function performed, it can be defined as a transforming, 
conversion, transmission or distribution substation.  A MV/
LV transformer electrical substation consists, therefore, of the 
set of devices dedicated to the transformation of the voltage 
supplied by the distribution network at medium voltage (e.g. 
20 kV), into voltage values suitable for the power supply of the 
low voltage lines (e.g. 400 V).
Electrical substations can also be divided into public and 
private substations:
– public substations: these belong to the electricity 
distribution company and supply private users in single-
phase or three-phase alternating current (typical voltage 
values for the two types of power supply could be 230 
V and 400 V). They are in turn divided into urban or rural 
substations, consisting of a single small power transformer. 
Urban substations are usually built in brick, whereas rural 
ones are often installed externally directly on the MV pylon.
– private substations: these can often be considered as 
terminal type substations, i.e. substations where the MV 
line ends at the installation point of the substation itself. 
They are owned by the User and can supply both civil users 
(schools, hospitals, etc.) and industrial users with supply 
from the public MV grid. The user must make available to 
the distributing company a special room, accessible to the 
staff of the company, in which the equipment for which 
the distribution company is responsible will be installed. 
There can be various design solutions, although in recent 
times the use of prefabricated substations is increasingly 
widespread.
4
2.1 Connection of the 
substation
The Standard CEI 0-16 suggests three steps for identifying 
the system for the connection.
Step 1, choosing the voltage level and point of the distribution 
network to which the user can be connected depending on 
the type, the size and operating requirements of the User 
installation and on the requirements and characteristics of the 
portion of the distribution network involved.
These choices are made by the Distributor based on the data 
listed below.
1.  Size of the installation, which must be compatible with 
the operating criteria of the network. In general terms, the 
voltage profiles, selectivity of the protections and the use 
made of the lines and transformers must be evaluated.
2.  Location of the surrounding loads in the layout of both the 
current and the planned network.
3.  Characteristics of the neighboring network.
4.  Contribution of any generators to the short-circuit 
power considering all the contributions of the installation 
(generators, motors, etc.). 
5.  Levels of interference introduced (rapid variations, 
harmonics, flicker, asymmetry of voltages) by the loads, 
both active and passive, that must be such that they do 
not exceed the levels established by Standard CEI EN 
61000-2-12 for the MV network. 
6.  User requirements regarding continuity of the service.
7.  User requirements regarding slow variations, voltage dips, 
short-circuit power and voltage quality.
8.  Possibility of developing the network in order to satisfy the 
requirements in the above points.
The indicative values of power that can be connected on 
the different voltage levels of the distribution networks are 
specified by the standard in the following table.
power MW Network voltage level
<= 0.1 LV
0.1 - 0.2
LV
MV
0.2 - 3
Upper limit raised to 6 MW 
for generating installations
MV
3 - 10
Lower limit raised to 6 MW 
for generating installations
MV
HV
5
3 C
SCSLSL
1
2
M UD
Pmax
Wh
varh
2.2  Structure of the substation
These substations are for the most part located in the in the 
actual premises of the establishment that they supply and 
basically consist of three distinct room, of which the first two 
are available to the Distributor:
–  Distributor room (D): where the switching devices of the 
Distributor are installed. This room must be large enough 
to allow for possible construction of the incoming-outgoing 
system that the Distributor is entitled to implement, even at 
a later stage to satisfy new requirements. The delivery room 
houses the sampling point that represents the boundary 
and the connection between the public grid and the user 
installation. 
–  metering room (M): where the metering equipment is 
located. Both of these rooms must be accessible from a 
public road, to allow maintenance by authorized personnel 
regardless of whether the User is present.
–  User room (U): intended to contain the MV and LV 
switchgear and protection devices of the User. This room 
must normally be adjacent to the other two rooms. 
D
Step 2, choosing the installation insertion scheme (in-out, 
antenna, etc.).
To determine the connection scheme the following factors 
must be taken into account:
– the size of the installation;
– the position of the installation in relation to the network 
and the presence, in the area of question, of generating 
installations, lines and primary and secondary substations;
– operation of the network to which the installation is 
connected;
– possibility to develop the network;
– protection and automation devices on the Distributor's 
network;
– User requirements concerning the continuity and quality of 
service.
Step 3, choosing the connection scheme (busbar systems 
and switching and disconnection parts, in relation to 
maintenance and the network protection system). Regardless 
of the connection solution chosen for the network system at 
the user site, the installation will always be as shown in the 
following figure.
Where: 
D  =  Distributor room at the user 
site. 
M  =  metering room, 
U  =  User room, 
SL  =  cubicle (cell) for line, 
SC  =  cubicle (cell) for delivery, 
C  =  connection point.  
1  =  metering unit, 
2  =  General User device, 
3  =  cubicle present/to be 
provided for incoming-
outgoing connection.
Connection diagram between the Distributor's substation at the user site and the User's passive system (CEI 0-16, Figure 7)
Connection cable (set up by the User)Line 
Line 
6
– Substation built on site or pre-assembled with 
prefabricated equipment  (internal installation of closed 
type CEI EN 61936-1): installation whose electrical 
components are encased in housing capable of ensuring 
protection against direct contact and which is implemented 
using prefabricated devices, such as MV and LV switchgear 
according to product standard CEI EN 62271-200. 
 By substation built on site we mean the structure made 
from concrete or brick or other material suitable for 
accommodating electrical equipment tested directly in situ. 
The typical constructive solution for an internal substation 
with prefabricated equipment is the following: 
 - MV switchgear consisting of a set of functional units 
according to the project;
 - one or more cells, equipped with walls or dividing panels 
and everything necessary for arranging transformers 
housed in prefabricated metal boxes, or else including any 
necessary protections against direct contacts;
 - LV switchgear consisting of a set of functional units.
2.3 Construction solutions
With regard to building solutions, the Guide CEI 99-4 
distinguishes between the following cases:
– Open substation (internal system of the open type 
according to CEI EN 61936-1): installation in which it 
not required to use MV components with casing able 
to provide protection against direct contact and which 
therefore needs to be completed on site with the security 
measures designed to protect persons against such risks 
in accordance with CEI EN 61936-1. The installation 
is implemented directly on the site by connecting the 
components appropriately and it is therefore practically 
impossible to run tests to verify the level of isolation 
achieved and the ability to withstand the effects of short-
circuit currents. The construction solution of a typical 
internal open substation, which is therefore built in a closed 
structure sheltered from the elements, generally consist of: 
 – one or more cells, equipped with walls or dividing panels, 
for positioning the MV components;
 – one or more cells, equipped with walls or dividing panels 
and everything necessary for positioning the transformers;
 – protection barriers such as frames, gratings and wire 
meshes, fastened rigidly with a minimum degree of 
protection IPXXB;
 – LV components arranged on open structures or in closed 
cabinets.
2.  Design and construction 
specifications of the substation
7
– Prefabricated substation in accordance with standards 
CEI EN 62271-202 and CEI EN 50532: the prefabricated 
substation is considered equipment conforming to the 
product standard and that has therefore passed all the 
required tests. The product standard, as well as ratings 
and test procedures, pays particular attention to the 
protection of persons, which is guaranteed by the use of 
components subjected to type tests and by a proper design 
and construction of the housing. The main components of a 
prefabricated substation, in addition to the casing, are: 
 - power transformers; 
 - medium and low voltage switchgear; 
 - medium and low voltage interconnections; 
 - auxiliary switchgear and circuits.
2.4 Main requirements
Regarding the location, the substation can be within the 
volume of the building to be powered or separate from it. It 
may also be located on the roof of the building to be served, 
of course, after a careful study of the static and dynamic 
loads to which the roof will be subjected. In any case, the 
location of the substations must be such that it allows 
authorized personnel to access it as necessary, to perform 
service operations and maintenance on the components of 
the substation, even of those of greater size and weight, such 
as transformers.
In addition, the substation structure must meet the 
requirements of the standards (CEI 99-4, Sec. 5 and CEI 
0-16, para. 8.5.9) as regards:
a)  low frequency magnetic fields 
b)  access
c)  walls, floors and ceilings, etc. in accordance with Standard 
CEI 61936-1
d)  ventilation
e)  infiltration of water or flooding
f)  the expected static and dynamic mechanical loads and 
internal overpressure caused by arcing
g)  lighting 
The substations must be fitted with lockable doors or 
otherwise require the use of tools to open or remove them so 
as to prevent access by unauthorized persons. In particular, 
the room hosting the metering systems must be accessible 
both by the User and by the Distributor.
The location of the structures must be such that the MV 
lines necessary for connection can be built and maintained 
in compliance with current regulations regarding electrical 
installations and safety as well as electromagnetic pollution.
Separation, in terms of responsibility for the operation, 
running and maintenance of the various substations, should 
be easily distinguished on the planimetric diagrams. 
Measurement of the energy withdrawn by a User at a 
sampling point must take place close to the MV connection 
using voltage and current transformers that are the 
responsibility of the Distributor. The dimensions of the 
connection room must necessarily allow the in-out insertion 
scheme to be adopted, which might be necessary at a later 
time. As a guideline, the overall surface area occupied by the 
delivery and metering room should be about 16 m 2.
The construction details are to be provided in the connection 
documentation provided by the Distributor; in any case, 
the design of the room for the network system at the user 
installation must comply with the regulations issued by the 
Distributor.
8
Before positioning equipment inside a substation, you must 
make sure that the correct distances are observed in the 
service areas, such as hallways, passages, access and 
escape routes.
In this regard, CEI 99-4 defines that the width of a 
maneuvering corridor inside a substation must be sufficient to 
perform any maneuver or maintenance operation. The width 
of this corridor must be at least 800 mm.
In particular, make sure that the doors in the open position 
or the mechanical switching devices protruding from the 
switchgear and controlgear do not reduce the width of the 
corridor to less than 500 mm.
User room (U)
Transformer 1
Switchgear 
Generator unit
LV Switchgear LV Switchgear
Electrical
switchgear
Transformer 2
Room for batteries
Metering room (M)
Fume exhaust
Distributor room (D)
Room for generator unit
Sample solution for substation (non-executive) with equipment against the walls (CEI 99-4, Fig. A.3)
Incom. 
MV
TR2
TR1
C.b.
Gener.
The passages for installation or maintenance located behind 
solid walls (e.g. closed switchgear) should not be less than 
500 mm. 
In essence, the staff must always have clear and safe access. 
Even overhead, under the ceiling, coverings or housing, with 
the sole exception of the cable conduits, a minimum height of 
2000 mm is required. 
As regards the escape routes, for the purposes of standard 
CEI EN 61936-1, the exits must be set up so that the length 
of the escape route within the structure does not exceed 
20 m for voltages up to 52 kV. The recommended length for 
escape routes, however, is no more than 10 m. In addition to 
this length it is recommended that the passages should be 
accessible from both sides. 
2.  Design and construction 
specifications of the substation
9
2.5 Characteristic of the 
structure 
Structural specifications
As for the construction of the building and its accessories, 
you should refer to Italian Ministerial Decree (infrastructure) 
14.01.2008 as subsequently amended “Approval of new 
technical standards for constructions” published in the 
Official Gazette. no. 29 of 4 February 2008. The decree 
defines the principles for the design, construction and testing 
of buildings in relation to the requirements of strength and 
stability. Consideration should also be given to Regulation 
(EU) 305/2011, which came into force on 1 July 2013 and 
which permanently replaces CPD Directive 89/106/EEC. The 
purpose of this Regulation is to regulate the introduction to 
the European market of all products (materials, manufactured 
products, systems, etc.) that are designed to become a 
permanent part of construction works (buildings and civil 
engineering works), which should ensure compliance with at 
least one of the following requirements, the first six of which 
were already specified by the previous Directive CPD 89/106, 
to which the last one is added:
– mechanical strength and stability
– safety in the event of fire
– hygiene, safety and environment
– safety during use
– protection against noise
– energy savings
– sustainable use of natural resources for creating the 
constructions. 
The EU Regulation 305 defines, in particular, the loads 
and impacts, nominal and/or characteristic, applicable to 
buildings, and therefore also the housing of a substation, 
which must therefore have enough mechanical strength to 
resist them; these are:
– permanent structural and non-structural loads such as the 
weights of the materials themselves 
– variable loads including loads related to the intended use of 
the work (persons, vehicles, etc.).
– seismic action
– combination of seismic action with the other actions
– actions of the wind
– actions of the snow
– actions of the temperature
– exceptional actions such as fires, explosions, shocks.
Specifications for seismic action
Since Italy is a country with high seismic exposure, it is 
important to consider this type of action in the design of the 
substation and in the choice of electrical equipment. Once 
again it is important to rely on qualified builders who have 
designed and tested their equipment in accordance with the 
relevant standards. In fact, the strong vibrations caused by 
an earthquake have a serious impact on the behavior of the 
electrical switchgear. 
This is demonstrated by the fact that CEI Guide 99-4 states 
in note 1 that when technical specification IEC TS 62271-210 
“High-voltage switchgear and controlgear - Part 210: Seismic 
qualification for metal enclosed and solid-insulation enclosed 
switchgear and controlgear assemblies for rated voltages 
above 1 kV and up to and including 52 kV” is published, it 
will be implemented by the CEI regardless of whether it is 
transposed by CENELEC.
In the past, the country was classified into zones according to 
seismic characteristics; each area was assigned a basic risk 
expressed in terms of maximum acceleration on rigid ground 
(g).
The current reference source is the web site of the INGV 
(Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia - National 
Institute of Geophysics and Volcanology) http://esse1.mi.ingv.
it/. From this site you can obtain the ag acceleration values 
for various probabilities of being exceeded in 50 years, 
corresponding to different return periods.
The entire national territory has been divided up using a 
calculation grid (steps of 0.05°, equal to approximately 5.5 km
in latitude and longitude) the points of which are identified by 
code numbers (ID). For each of the 16852 points, ordered 
from west to east and from north to south, the average values 
(50th percentile) and those corresponding to the 16th and 
84th percentile are given.
Using the seismic risk interactive map you can easily ascertain 
the acceleration value ag corresponding to the zone where 
the substation is located and ask the manufacturer of the MV 
switchgear to provide a suitable product that matches the 
specifications of Technical Specification IEC/TS 62271-210, in 
particular as regards the level of severity:
– level 1, recommended for peak ground/floor accelerations 
up to 0.5 g;
– level 2, recommended for peak ground/floor acceleration up 
to 1.0 g.
Note that the ag values provided by the site require 
knowledgeable use and should therefore their use is solely the 
responsibility of the user. 
10
Source: Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia (National institute of Geophysics and Volcanology).
2.  Design and construction 
specifications of the substation
The seismic hazard map available on the website of the National 
Institute of Geophysics and Volcanology is shown below.
11
Severity Level 2 (hor.):
Severity Level 2 (horizonthal) – Zero period acceleration (ZPA) = 1 g
The functional units of the ABB UniSec switchgear have been 
tested up to level 2, equivalent to Standard IEEE 693 high 
performance level.
The RRS corresponding to severity level 2 indicated in IEC/TS 
62271-210 are provided below. 
The form of the spectrum (Required Response Spectra, 
or RRS) can simulate the various conditions related to the 
intensity, depth and distance from the epicenter of the 
earthquake, the ground type and the high position of the 
switchgear located on the upper floors.
Horizontal Acceleration
[m/s2]
Frequency [Hz]
  RRS (hor.) ZPA 1g d=2% (level 2)
   RRS (hor.) ZPA 1g d=5% (level 2)
  RRS (hor.) ZPA 1g d=10% (level 2)
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0 10 100
12
The figure indicates the positions of the accelerometers during the seismic test.
2.  Design and construction 
specifications of the substation
13
Symbols
R Bearing 
capacity
P or 
Ph 
Continuity of current or signaling 
capacity
E Resistance G Resistance on soot burning 
I Insulation K Fire protection capacity
W Radiation D Duration of stability at constant 
temperature
M Mechanical 
action
DH Duration of stability along the 
standard time-temperature curve
C Automatic 
closing device
F Functionality of motorized smoke and 
heat exhaust systems
S Smoke 
resistance
B Functionality of natural smoke and 
heat exhaust systems 
Fire point Net heat of combustion
Class O ≤     300 °C Class 1 ≥     42 MJ/kg
Class K > 300 °C Class 2 
<     42 MJ/kg
≥     32 MJ/kg
Class L No measurable 
fire point 
Class 3 <     32 MJ/kg 
Example Mineral transformer oil (IEC 60296) has a classification of O1.
Specifications for fire action
As regards resistance to fire, the standard requires that the 
means of classification of fire resistance of construction 
products and elements of construction works must be 
identified in accordance with the Decree of the Ministry of 
Interior of 16/02/2007.
The aforementioned Ministerial Decree provides the following 
explanatory table regarding the classification:
Classifications are typically expressed in minutes, e.g. for 
floors and roofs, REI 60 indicates the load-bearing capacity, 
resistance and insulation against fire will be maintained for 60 
minutes.
In particular, as regards activities subject to fire prevention 
control, and in our case substations with fixed electrical 
machines with presence of combustible insulating liquids in 
quantities exceeding 1 m 3 and substations inserted in the 
volume of the buildings subject to fire prevention control, 
the fire resistance of the structures must be certified in 
the manner required by Annex II of the Ministerial Decree 
07/08/2012 using the forms available from the website www.
vigilfuoco.it.
The following table extracted from Standard IEC EN 60695-1-
40, Fire Hazard Testing, Part 1-40: Guidelines for Assessing 
the Fire Hazard of Electrotechnical products - Insulating 
Liquids, we can find the classification of insulating liquids 
in relation to the point of combustion and the heat of 
combustion:
Finally, we come to Standard CEI EN 61936-1 that prescribes 
the requirements that the substation structure must possess 
in the event of a fire involving transformers with different 
characteristics, namely:
– REI 60 for transformers up to 1000 liters of oil type O
– REI 90 transformers for more than 1000 liters of oil type O
– REI 60 for dry transformers in class F0, while non-
combustible walls are enough in the case of dry type 
transformers in class F1 (CEI EN 60076-11 Power 
transformers Part 11: Dry-type transformers). 
For transformers with oil content greater than 1000 liters you 
also need to refer to the Ministerial Decree of 15 July 2014: 
Approval of the Technical Regulation for Fire Prevention for the 
Design, Installation and Operation of Fixed Electrical Machines 
with Presence of Combustible Insulating Fluids in a Quantity 
Exceeding 1 m 3. Official Journal 5 August 2014, no. 180.
Again in the case of substations containing transformers in 
oil, in order not to pollute the environment, the Standard CEI 
EN 61936-1 states that measures must be implemented for 
the containment of the insulating oil by providing a waterproof 
floor with the containment thresholds around the area where 
the transformer is located or by conveying the leaked fluid 
into a suitable containment area within the building. When 
defining the containment volume you need to consider the 
total volume of the insulating liquid in the transformer and the 
water discharged from the fire fighting system.
The figure shows a section of the transformer room where the 
hatched area indicates the containment volume.
When disposing of the products of combustion in the event 
of a fire the Fire Prevention Regulations must be taken into 
account.
Threshold
14
2.6 Thermal sizing and 
ventilation
While the devices are operating they must not exceed the 
maximum temperature to avoid degrading the insulating 
materials or having to resort to downgrading.
In the room where the switchgear and controlgear are located 
the following must be provided:
– in the lower part, one or more air inlets with their bottom 
edge raised from adequately above the floor of the room 
(approximately 20 cm);
– at the top, flues or windows, preferably open towards to the 
fresh air.
Obviously, the vents can not draw from rooms that are at 
high temperatures or from places that are classified at risk of 
explosion according to Standard CEI 31-30 and must in any 
case ensure a degree of protection that will prevent water or 
snow from penetrating, and animals or objects from getting in 
that could cause accidents.
Where there is switchgear insulated with SF 6, please note that 
this gas complies with CEI 10-7 and is not toxic; however, 
since it can generate oxygen insufficiency (this occurs 
when the percentage of oxygen in the air falls below 18%) 
an excessive concentration must be prevented.  For this 
purpose, in structures located above ground level, natural 
ventilation is sufficient.
In structures below ground level if a harmful concentration is 
possible, forced ventilation must be provided. This also true 
for compartments (e.g. conduits) positioned under switchgear 
in SF 6. However, forced ventilation may be omitted when the 
volume of SF 6 gas in a compartment of a bigger size than 
the switchgear and controlgear, in relation to atmospheric 
pressure, does not exceed 10% of the volume of the 
structure.
The entire Annex J of Standard CEI 99-4 is dedicated to the 
thermal sizing and ventilation of the structure.
Speaking of ventilation, Annex B of CEI 99-4 provides a 
summary of the requirements of standard CEI EN 50272-2 
concerning the ventilation of battery rooms and an indicative 
example. During charging, the batteries develop hydrogen 
and oxygen as a result of the electrolysis process. The 
ventilation of battery rooms is necessary to keep the hydrogen 
concentration in the air volume in question below the danger 
of explosion, in other words 4%. 
2.  Design and construction 
specifications of the substation
Example views of a substation (non-executive) to highlight the ventilation windows (CEI 99-4, Figure A.5)
Front view
Rear View
15
 
 
 
Example of an electrical substation (non-executive) highlighting the ducts in the floor and the conduits (CEI 99-4, Fig. A.2)
Unified door 
by the distributorOutput 
cables
 
of the 
customer
Tubes for MV and LV 
of the distributer
Metering room (M)
Distributor room (D)
Conduit for the distributor
No. 2 tubes for 
measurement 
ø 100 mm
Key
 Traps with 
dimensions
according to requirements
Conduits and traps with a 
depth of about 50 cm
Note: the possible 
insulating liquid collection 
sumps have not been 
indicatedNo. 1 tube
ø 160 mmNo. 2 tubes
ø 160 mm
No. 3 tubes
ø 160 mm
Conduit
Conduit
Conduit
Conduit
Room for batteriesRoom for generator unit
User room (U)
2.7 Artificial lighting
To allow the substation to be operated more easily and safely, 
artificial lighting must guarantee an illuminance level of 200 lx 
referring, unless otherwise stated, to a uniformity factor of at 
least 0.7 (UNI EN 12464-1).
For emergency/security lighting, for example, to identify the 
escape routes and the exits of the substation, the illuminance 
level must be equal to at least 1 lx that can be obtained using 
autonomous lighting equipment (for example by equipping 
operators with a portable lighting device with one hour 
autonomy).
2.8 Electrical cables in the 
substation: position, entry 
points and separation of 
the circuits
As regards the cables, in substations we can have the 
following situations:
– accessible sub-panel compartment, or a walkable basement 
under the supporting plane of the switchgear, for which a net 
height of not less than 1.7 m is recommended. This solution 
is suitable for cases where the cables entering and leaving 
the substation are many and buried
– floating floor with removable tiles and inspectable space 
for cables for which we a height of not less than 0.6 m is 
recommended. This solution is suitable for cases where the 
number of incoming and outgoing cables is limited while the 
number of interconnection cables between the switchgear 
of the same substation is high
– conduits, or a fixed floor and cables contained in conduits 
prefabricated or built on site
– walkways or equivalent systems (see CEI EN 61936-1); the 
connections between the various components are mainly 
implemented by using ceiling cable suspension systems 
and wall mounted systems made of insulating or metal 
material
– The Distributor normally indicates how the holes for 
passing of cables are to be created, between the part of 
the Distributor's part of the substation structure and the 
customer's receiver part. In any case, all openings to the 
outside must be made in accordance with the Standards 
CEI 11-17 and CEI EN 61936-1 to prevent the entry of 
animals and water and to prevent the spread of any fires
– we also emphasize compliance with Standard CEI EN 
61936-1 and the product standard for the cables for the 
sizing and positioning of the conduits and protective tubes 
embedded in the masonry that must ensure compliance with 
the curvature radii of the cables and allow free expansion
– the armor or metal screen of the cables can be considered 
as metallic segregation. Therefore the MV cables that are 
laid on walkways, conduits, piping, etc., can coexist with 
low voltage cables
16
2.9  Earthing systems
Particular attention should be paid to the design and 
construction of the substation earthing system. The earthing 
system is not addressed directly by CEI 99-4 that refers for 
such details to CEI EN 50522 and for MV systems and to CEI 
64-8 only for the relevant LV systems.
The figure below, taken from CEI 99-4, illustrates - merely by 
way of example - some characteristics of the earthing system 
in order to draw attention to the elements that make up the 
earthing system.
Example of substation earthing system (non-executive) and corresponding collector (CEI 99-4, Fig. A.4)
Perimeter earthing ring (bare Cu conductor 2 mm 2)
Key
a -  Connection between earthing collector and earthing system of structures other than the substation
b -  Connection between transformer 1 star centre and earthing collector
c -  Connection between transformer 2 star centre and earthing collector
d -  Connection to the public distributor in the manner requested
e -  Connection between earthing collector and electro-welded mesh under the foundation
f -  Connection between the peripheral earthing ring and collector
x -  Reinforcement bars of the perimeter earthing ring for connections to the conductive parts
User room
Room for batteries
Meter room
Electro-welded mesh
Distributor room
Room for generator unit
2.  Design and construction 
specifications of the substation
17
We will look at the main requirements of the earthing system 
for the three types of substations.
Isolated substation (separated from the building)
– If necessary, insert a perimeter ring earth plate in the 
foundation excavation, consisting of a conductor buried 
directly in virgin soil.
– All the reinforcement steel elements of the foundation can 
be used as an earthing rod.
– Given that the lateral structural elements of the building are 
connected together for reasons of staticity, if necessary 
they should be connected to the underfloor electrically 
welded mesh to obtain better equalization.
– All the elements that contribute to the formation of the earth 
plate must be connected (individually or in groups) to the 
collector of the substation.
Substation included within the volume of the building
– The earth plate will be part of the general earth plate of 
the building (considered as meshed or a ring or equivalent) 
and will consist of current elements, using the iron bars of 
the foundations, possibly supplemented by an intentional 
earthing rod.
– All the elements that contribute to the formation of the 
earth plate are connected to the main earth collector of the 
building, which is not necessarily located in the substation 
structure.
– The collector of the substation is in any case connected to 
the main collector.
– In particular, the substation and in its immediate vicinity, 
measures must be taken to achieve equalization of the 
potential. In addition, the measures to limit the potentials 
due to earth faults must be evaluated.
Substation in traditional masonry or prefabricated on the roof 
of a building
– The earth plate will be part of the main earth plate of the 
building, and must consist of current elements; in particular, 
for equalization of potential it is recommended that the 
reinforcing bars of the pillars and the floor slab of the roof 
should be connected.
– The collector of the substation will be connected to the 
structure of the building directly on the floor where the 
substation will be positioned.
Elements of the earth plate
– The earth plate can be implemented as a ring with copper 
wire or a steel bar according to Standard CEI EN 50522 
and CEI Guide 11-37. 
– If necessary, the ring may be supplemented with outreaches 
or with a second outer ring at a greater depth, possibly 
supplemented, for example, with copper-plated steel pegs 
1.50 m in length complete with a collar for fastening the 
copper rope.
– Due the type and use of current elements, please refer to 
the Guide CEI 64-12 and CEI 11-37.
– All the necessary measures must be taken to limit 
the effects of corrosion, with particular attention to 
combinations of different metals (see UNI standards or the 
Guides CEI 11-37 and CEI 64-12 within the relevant scope). 
– The filling soil around the earth plate must be of vegetation 
type and must not contain any waste material.
Earthing terminal
– The earth collector (in the form of not necessarily just one 
drawbar, or a ring) must constitute the point of connection 
between the elements of the substation earth plate, the 
earth plate of the building where the substation is inserted 
(if required), the MV earth conductors, the LV protective 
conductors LV and the equipotential conductors. The 
horizontal ducts for implementing these connections are 
preferably arranged in the floor of the substation.
– The studs of reinforcing rods provided as connection points 
must be left free from the pouring of the floor.
– To facilitate the maintenance and checking operations the 
individual conductors arriving at the collector should be 
signposted. 
– The protective, equipotential and earthing conductors, if not 
exposed, must have a yellow/green sheath. 
– The sizing for the sections of the collector and of all the 
protective conductors is performed by the designer, 
according to the MV and LV earth fault current.
– The equipotential conductors for the MV installation, if 
made of copper, must have a minimum cross-section of 
16 mm 2, (see CEI EN 50522). For LV installations, the main 
equipotential conductors, if made of copper, must have a 
minimum cross section of 6 mm 2 (see Standard CEI 64-8 
for the relevant installations).
18
2.10 Earthing devices required 
by the connection
To carry out work with the equipment de-energized, 
Standards CEI EN 50110-1 and CEI 11-27 establish that after 
identifying the corresponding electrical systems, the following 
five essential requirements must be observed in the order 
specified:
1)  isolate the part of the system involved in the work;
2)  take measures against untimely closing the of the 
disconnector device;
3)  make sure that the system is de-energized;
4)  earth and short-circuit the isolated parts;
5)  ensure protection against any adjacent live parts.
Regarding point 4), for the construction of the connection, 
reference must be made to CEI 0-16, para. 8.2.1 where it 
stresses that earthing and short-circuiting of the HV system 
(voltage greater than 1 kV) can be implemented in two ways:
– by applying movable devices;
– using, where available, the devices intended for earthing 
and short-circuiting the relevant part of the installation. 
The User can therefore adopt one of the following system 
solutions:
1.  Do not use any earthing switch immediately downstream of 
the terminals of the network connection cable (in the User 
room, network side); in this case the earthing required 
by standard CEI 11-27 must be achieved using mobile 
earthing devices made according to Standard CEI EN 
61230: Live works - Portable devices for earthing or for 
earthing and short-circuiting.
 In particular, the User must also make sure that there is no 
voltage on the cable in question, earth it and short-circuit it 
using the aforementioned earthing devices. An appropriate 
notice must be be affixed to the panel the removal of which 
allows access to the terminals of the cable saying “COVER/
DOOR REMOVABLE ONLY AFTER ENERGY NETWORK 
ACTION”. 
2. Provide an earthing switch immediately downstream of 
the terminals of the network connection cable (in the 
User room, network side); in this case the Distributor's 
personnel must deliver a key - that cannot be copied for 
the User - that is freed once the earthing switch of the 
Distributor's delivery cubicle (cell) has been closed and 
which allows the User's first earthing switch to be closed. 
An appropriate warning must be affixed on this earthing 
switch that says "SWITCH TO BE OPERATED ONLY 
AFTER INTERVENTION BY THE DISTRIBUTOR".
 Prior to connection, the Distributor must be informed of 
which solution was chosen. Once the connection exists, 
the User cannot change the solution unless there is prior 
written consent from the Distributor.
2.  Design and construction 
specifications of the substation
19
-QCE
-QCE
-PFV2
-PFV2
-BAD
-BAD
-BCR
-BCR
-BCN
-BCN
-BAD
-BAD
-PFV1
-PFV1
-QCE1
3
3
5
5
6
6
1
1
2
2
-BCS
-BCS
-QAB
-QAB
-QBS
-QBS
2.11 Rating plates, warnings 
and diagrams
Signs must be installed in the MV/LV substation (prohibition, 
warning and alert) created (pictograms and any tests) 
according to the provisions of Legislative Decree 81/2008, as 
amended, Annex XXV and UNI EN ISO 7010:2012.
The signs must be made of materials as far as possible 
resistant to impacts, weather and damage caused by 
environmental factors.
Some examples of signs that can be used in an electrical 
substation are shown later.
The Standard provides examples for correct positioning of 
notices, rating plates and signs:
– Outside each access door and on every side of any fences:
 - “no entry for unauthorized persons”;
 - “dangerous voltage”;
 - “possible identification of the electrical substation”;
– outside the entrance door to the structure, in addition to the 
previous three:
 - “do not use water to extinguish fires”;
 - “voltage ... kV”;
– inside the substation:
 - “Instructions for emergency aid to be provided to those 
injured by electricity” with the sections for the telephone 
numbers to be contacted case of necessity (the nearest 
doctors, hospitals, ambulances, etc.) filled in;
 - wiring diagram, which must also indicate, if relevant, also 
the color coding used for the various voltages;
– near MV switchgear,
 - “voltage … kV”;
– available to the maintenance personnel, 
 - “do not perform switching operations”;
– on any emergency exits:
 - the appropriate sign.
Two examples of UniSec JTI switchgear are shown below, 
the first with a keyed earthing switch on the Distributor side 
that is the responsibility of the Distributor, and the second 
with provision for earthing via an insulating rod.
20
Fonte: Norme UNI EN ISO 7010.
Warning sign with explicit reference 
to the deactivation of the electrical 
system before starting work on it
Combined sign with prohibitions 
and warning that can be 
supplemented by explicit wording 
under one or more of the 
combined elements
 Combined sign with prohibition 
and warning and with a clear 
indication of the prohibitions or 
obligations
Sign for identification of the circuits 
with different colors for the different 
voltage levels and for the earthing 
conductors
Sign for identification of the voltage of 
an electrical substation (switchgear)
Sign for identification the accumulator 
battery room
The sign for first emergency first aid is shown below; the 
standard recommends filling in the necessary data at the 
bottom of the sign to ensure the prompt arrival of help.
It is also necessary to indicate any autonomous energy 
sources near the circuit disconnection device, the presence 
of accumulator batteries or capacitors on the doors of 
the corresponding cells and lastly, for complex electric 
substations, a single line diagram should be displayed.
Do not alter the state of the circuit-breaker
Sign forbidding access to unauthorized 
persons
Do not extinguish with water
Sign warning of the danger of hazardous 
electrical voltage
Sign warning of the hazard of flammable 
material or high temperature
Sign warning of danger due to an 
autonomous energy source
Note that the standardized pictograms can be combined 
and supplemented by explicit wording to make them more 
complete and understandable.
Source: UNI EN ISO 7010 standards.
2.  Design and construction 
specifications of the substation
21
EMERGENCY FIRST AID TO BE GIVEN 
TO THOSE SUFFERING ELECTRIC SHOCKS
IMMEDIATE ACTION
It is critical when the shock affects breathing and cardiac activity; if the victim is not given aid within 3 or 4 minutes he/she can suffer 
irreparable consequences. Ensure first of all that the victim is out of contact with live parts and then immediately start giving artificial 
respiration. DO NOT DELAY AID, NOT EVEN TO CALL THE DOCTOR, unless there are at least two aid givers, or if the sole aid giver can 
call the attention of others without abandoning the victim.
DO NOT TOUCH
the victim, if you are not sure that he/she is no longer in contact with, or immediately adjacent to live parts. If this not so, disconnect the 
power. If the circuit cannot be promptly disconnected, insulation your person by means of insulating gloves,
dry clothes, by standing on dry wooden planks etc. and remove the victim, preferably grabbing him/her by his/her clothes if they are dry. 
Alternatively, with a single swift and decisive movement, distance the live part from the victim using insulating rods, pieces of dry wood or 
other objects made of insulating material. Do not touch any other objects yourself, especially if they are metal. IF THE ORONASAL MASK 
IS NOT AVAILABLE, THE MOUTH TO MOUTH OR MOUTH TO NOSE TECHNIQUE MAY BE USED, POSSIBLY INTERPOSITION PLACING 
A HANDKERCHIEF OR GAUZE BETWEEN.
ARTIFICIAL RESPIRATION
with an oronasal mask:
1. Lay the victim on his/her back and position yourself by the side of his/her head. 2. Equip yourself with an appropriate oronasal mask and 
position the valve unit correctly in the neck of the mask (see fig. A). 3. Tilt the victim's head back slightly (to open the air passage) placing 
one hand behind his/her head while the other acts as a lever on the forehead (see fig. B). 4. Apply the mask, covering the nose and mouth 
of the victim, making sure that it stays in the position shown in Fig. B (see fig. C). 5. Give two slow, deep breaths and observe the rising 
of the victim's chest. When the chest returns to its natural position, perform a regular cycle of 12-15 insufflations per minute (see fig. D).
 A  B  C  D
IMPORTANT: if the person vomits, remove the mask, turn the head to one side and clean the mouth. Before reusing the mask, blow into 
the mask to clean it.
CARDIAC MASSAGE
If not only the breathing stops but there is no heartbeat (to look for this sign, using two fingers press the victim's 
neck to either side of the Adam's apple), you must perform an external heart massage by pressing rhythmically 
on the chest. To do this: 1. Apply both hands superimposed with the palms facing down on the lower part of 
the sternum (see the figure at the side). 2. Apply rhythmic vertical pressure actions using your bodyweight and 
taking your hands away from the thorax each time to allow it to expand by elasticity. 3. C ontinue at a rate of 
50-60 pressure actions per minute. Cardiac massage must always be preceded by artificial respiration with oral 
insufflation. Therefore, while the first aid giver is giving artificial respiration using the oronasal mask, a second will 
simultaneously perform CPR. If the aid giver is alone, he/she should behave as follows: start with 5 heart mas-
sage - perform oral insufflation - continue with another 5 massages - perform an insufflation, and so on. S uspend 
insufflation actions only when the victim has resumed breathing on his/her own and the pupils start to shrink again: however, check for 
some time to make sure that spontaneous breathing is maintained. I f this is not the case, continue also during transport to the hospital 
and until specialized health personnel can take over. 
After recovery, the victim must not be removed until he/she can breathe normally without assistance. He/she should be examined by a 
doctor before being allowed to walk. He/she must not be given any stimulant, unless directed by the doctor. Remember also that TIMELI-
NESS IS CRITICAL.
IN THE PRESENCE OF BURNS
1. First of all, start artificial respiration and possibly cardiac massage if the victim is not breathing and has no cardiac activity. 2. Do not 
remove burned clothes and do not break any blisters. 3. Do not apply lotions or ointments. 4. Cover the burn with sterile, dry gauze. Also 
treat any burns (checking to see if there are any) at the exit points of the current. 5. If the victim has lost consciousness and is able to 
swallow, you can give him/her 300 g. water (a bowl) by mouth in which the baking soda and salt contained in the bags provided has been 
dissolved. If the victim vomits stop administering the liquid immediately. 6. Transfer the victim to hospital without delay. 
NEAREST DOCTORS    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . tel. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  tel. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
NEAREST HOSPITAL    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . tel. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
NEAREST AMBULANCE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . tel. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Source: UNI EN ISO 7010 standards.
ACT IMMEDIATELY - DELAYING IS FATAL...
MAKE SURE, HOWEVER THAT THE VICTIM
IS NOT STILL TOUCHING ANY LIVE PARTS
22
Scheme E: Inserting a section of line with a rigid T shunt on 
an existing MV line only with the circuit-breaker at the network 
connection system. This scheme is the simplest and least 
expensive, but reduces the reliability of the networks; it also 
provides inferior continuity of service. This connection is to be 
understood as exceptional.
In conclusion, of the connection solution chosen for the 
network system at the user site, the installation will always be 
as shown in the figure on page 5. Starting from the MV cable 
downstream of the connection point, the figure indicates 
the layout of a passive User's system for connection. With 
reference to the above figure, the Distributor's substation at 
the user site is the substation created to connect the User's 
system. 
Existing 
secondary 
substation
Existing 
secondary 
substation
Existing 
secondary 
substation
Existing 
secondary 
substation
Existing 
secondary 
substation
A
Existing 
primary 
substation
Existing 
secondary 
substation
Existing 
secondary 
substation
Existing 
secondary 
substation
Existing 
secondary 
substation
D
D
D
D
D
M
M
M
M
M
U
U
U
U
U
The schematic diagrams regarding insertion of the User's 
installation on the Distributor's network for connection 
systems are shown in the following figures:
Scheme A: Insertion in-and-out mode for connection in the 
vicinity of an existing line, so as to generate only two line 
sections belonging to two distinct secondary substations. 
Under this scheme, the User can be powered again providing 
better continuity of service.
Scheme B1: Insertion in antenna mode from a HV/MV station; 
in this case, it involves the construction of a line powered 
directly from a primary HV/MV substation. This type of 
insertion can be adopted when insertion along an existing line 
is not technically possible. In any case, the room dedicated 
to the network system at the user site must be able to 
accommodate the equipment for possible future adoption of 
in-out insertion.
Scheme B2: Insertion in antenna mode from a HV/MV 
substation for connection via a line section connected to the 
MV busbars of an existing distribution substation. The room 
dedicated to the network system at the user site must be able 
to accommodate the equipment for possible future adoption 
of in-out insertion.
Scheme C: Insertion in antenna mode with actuating 
means (optionally in an additional substation A) along an 
existing line. From the actuating means, there must be a line 
dedicated to powering a user. The room possibly dedicated 
to the actuating means must be able to accommodate the 
equipment for possible future adoption of in-out insertion.
3.  Schematic diagrams for the connection
23
4.  Sizing and choice of equipment and 
components
The choice of the wiring diagram of the substation, and 
therefore of the related equipment, depends on several 
factors such as:
– the number of power lines
– the number of transformers
– the requirements of the service, etc.
While it is true that the equipment and components of 
the substations must be chosen based on the rated 
characteristics and environmental conditions of the installation 
location, it is also important, on the basis of what we saw in 
the previous chapters, to adopt the necessary precautions, 
during the substation design phase, so that the operating 
temperatures do not exceed the maximum values allowed by 
the product standards for the equipment, so as not impair 
their electrical lifetime and safety.
With particular reference to the Standard CEI 0-16, the 
general device (or DG) and the protection system associated 
with the General Device (or General Protection System, 
abbreviated as SPG below) are essential elements for 
connection of the Distributor's network.
The SPG consists of:
– current, phase and earthing transformers/transducers 
(and possibly voltage transformers/transducers) with the 
associated connections to the protection relay
– protection relay with its power supply
– opening circuits of the circuit-breaker.
The main technical characteristics and the choice of these 
devices are described below.
4.1 Disconnectors, 
switch-disconnectors, 
multifunction devices
MV systems must include an isolating device upstream of 
each switch disconnector that does not comply with the 
standards for disconnectors, for example, a non-withdrawable 
circuit breaker, and also on the power lines or with possible 
return power supply.
MV fuses must, in particular, be associated to a switching an 
disconnection device that allows them to be replaced safely, 
such as a switch-disconnector.
Conversely, prefabricated withdrawable circuit-breakers with 
metal enclosures addressed by the CEI EN 62271-200 also 
perform the disconnection function.
Since the disconnectors are not equipped with closing and 
interruption power, they must be operated in the absence 
of current and are typically interlocked with the associated 
switching equipment so as to prevent them from opening or 
closing under load. 
In addition, each disconnection device should be 
associated to an earthing switch interlocked with its open or 
disconnected position.
For these reasons it is often preferable to have a multifunction 
device; these devices, since they are coordinated, in fact 
allow all the problems related to interlocks to be resolved with 
factory-tested mechanical solutions. 
24
6
4
7
3
5
8
2
9
1
There are basically two types of multifunction devices:
– line switch-disconnector/earthing switch
– circuit-breaker/feeder disconnector/earthing switch
The ABB GSEC switch-disconnector/earthing switch is based 
precisely on this design philosophy. The enclosure consists 
two half-shells; the upper one in insulating epoxy resin 
makes it possible to minimize the distances to the walls of 
the switchgear, and therefore to achieve particularly compact 
solutions. The lower half-shell, on the other hand, is made of 
stainless steel and allows the metallic segregation between 
the busbar compartment and the compartment adjacent to 
the switchgear, allowing the earthing of the two compartments 
and therefore allowing personnel to operate safely. With this 
solution it is possible to design electrical switchgear classified 
as PM (Metal Partition). 
In accordance with Standard CEI EN 62271-1, the device is 
classified as a “sealed pressure system” since no interventions 
related to the gas will be required during its operational life, in 
this case 30 years. In addition, the high number of mechanical 
operations (class M2=5000 operations with a single spring 
operating mechanism and class M1=1000 operations with 
a double spring mechanism) and electrical operations (class 
E3 on line contacts with 5 closures on short-circuit currents 
and 100 interruptions on the rated current) help to make it a 
virtually maintenance-free device. Its compactness is further 
improved also by the integration of the capacitive sockets 
and cable connections directly on the lower insulators. The 
switchgear can then mount a Voltage Presence Indicating 
System (VPIS) system, which signals the presence of voltage 
on the cables connected to the switchgear in accordance 
with the Standard IEC 61958. Upon completion of the safety 
measures we find a mechanical indication of the position of 
the switchgear, a signal connected directly to the operating 
shaft of the switchgear (as per Annex A of IEC 62271-102). 
4.  Sizing and choice of equipment and 
components
1 Opening and closing push-buttons 
2. Connection for the line operating 
lever
3. Connection for the earth operating 
lever
4. Voltage signalling lamps    
(if applicable)
Line Open Earth
5. Top insulators
6.  Enclosure (power part)
7. Housing of the operating 
mechanism
8. Bottom insulators
9.  Mimic diagram 
25
5
3
2
4
6
1
A further development of this concept is the ABB HySec 
multifunction device, an integrated and highly compact 
solution that combines the functions of three different devices: 
circuit-breaker, line disconnector and earthing switch; as in 
the case of the GSsec, the bottom stainless steel part allows 
metal segregation between the cable compartment and 
the busbar compartment, guaranteeing maximum operator 
safety during installation or maintenance of the switchgear 
but, at the same time, ensuring continuity of service. In this 
case too, it has to be considered that the interlocks between 
the various functions are part of the appliance itself and are 
therefore factory tested. The integrated solution is therefore 
particularly interesting for use in medium voltage switchgear 
for secondary distribution.
The circuit-breaker function is integrated in the upper part and 
for this purpose a vacuum circuit breaker is housed in the in 
the upper half-shell. The lower half-shell houses a line switch-
disconnector (to isolate the cables from the busbars) and 
earthing switch (to earth the actual cables). 
The use of vacuum interrupters to interrupt short-circuit 
currents provides a brilliant way to isolate the arc chamber of 
the circuit-breaker from the rest of the environment, filled with 
SF6, which is therefore aimed at the isolation and operation of 
the disconnector. The vacuum interruption also ensures high 
electrical performance.
The appliance is very flexible in that it can be used both as 
an input and output unit. In addition, the very limited number 
of components that characterize this integrated solution and 
the fact that it is tested as a single device makes it intrinsically 
very reliable. In accordance with Standard CEI EN 62271-1, 
the device is classified as a “sealed pressure system” since 
no interventions related to the gas will be required during 
its operational life, in this case 30 years. Its compactness 
is further improved also by the integration of the capacitive 
sockets and cable connections directly on the lower 
insulators.
1.  Operating mechanism of the the interrupting part
2.  Resin housing of the interrupting part
3.  Mechanical interlock between feeder disconnector and earthing switch
4.  Lower part in stainless steel
5.  Operating mechanism of the line disconnector and the earthing switch
6.  Lower isolators with integrated capacitive sockets
 Closed Open Isolated  Earth
26
Gas circuit-breakers HD4/R-Sec
(with REF601 relay and current sensors) 
 Vacuum circuit-breakers VD4/R-Sec
(with REF601 relay and current sensors) 
4.2 Circuit-breakers
It is important to underline that as a general device DG it is 
recommended to use a circuit-breaker, because the standard 
requires all MV Users to be protected against earth faults. 
The choice of general device may therefore fall either on the 
multifunction device that we have already seen or, if a more 
traditional solution is required and with higher performance 
electrical characteristics in terms of rated current and 
breaking capacity, on circuit-breakers. Obviously the Standard 
CEI 99-4 emphasizes that in MV systems the circuit-breakers 
must have adequate breaking and closing capacity for the 
short-circuit current calculated at the point of installation. It 
also suggests including an alarm that will immediately signal a 
power outage on the operating mechanism so that immediate 
action can be taken to restore its power supply (see also 
Standard CEI 0-16).
ABB circuit-breakers of the VD4/R and HD4/R series with 
lateral operating mechanisms have been designed specifically 
for use in secondary distribution switchgear and are used 
in MV/LV transformer substations in the industrial sector in 
general and in the service sector. The use of vacuum circuit-
breakers provides particular advantages in power systems 
where required frequent operations are required with normal 
operating currents. VD4/R vacuum circuit-breakers provide 
high operating reliability and a long life.
The HD4/R medium voltage gas circuit-breaker uses SF 6 gas 
to extinguish the electric arc and as the insulating medium. 
This circuit-breaker too, like the previous one, is built using 
the separate pole technique. Its construction is compact, 
sturdy and lightweight and is a lifetime sealed pressure 
system (IEC 62271-1).
4.  Sizing and choice of equipment and 
components
27
4.3 Measuring and protection 
transformers
The CTs (current or amperometric transformers) and VTs 
(voltage or voltmetric transformers) are required in the 
installations to reduce the current and voltage values of the 
installation to values that can be read by measuring and 
protection devices; another important function is to make 
secondary measuring and protection circuits galvanically 
independent from the primary power circuit, thus ensuring 
greater safety for operators.
For clearer understanding we have adopted the abbreviations 
defined by Standard CEI 0-16:
– TA-I: Current transformers/transducers of the inductive type
– TA-NI: Non-inductive current transformers/transducers
– TA-T: Current transformers/transducers of the inductive type 
without primary winding (of the toroidal type)
– TO: Residual current transformer/transducer of the 
inductive type without primary winding (of the toroidal type)
– TV-I: Voltage transformers/transducers of the inductive type
– TV-NI: Non-inductive voltage transformers/transducers for 
use in MV networks
Inductive transformers (TA-I, TA-T, TO, TV-I)
The main regulatory references for CTs and VTs, also of the 
inductive type (with iron plates) in medium voltage networks 
are:
CEI EN 61869-1: Measuring transformers, Part 1: General 
requirements
CEI EN 61869-2: Measuring transformers, Part 2: Additional 
requirements for current transformers
CEI EN 61869-3: Measuring transformers, Part 3: Additional 
requirements for inductive voltage transformers
These Standards specify the construction characteristics 
and the definition of the precision classes. One should bear 
in mind that the precision class for measuring CTs and VTs 
and for protection VTs depends on the load that is connected 
to the secondary: the precision is only guaranteed when the 
secondary load is greater than 25% of the rated performance 
of the transformer. Considering the present low consumption 
levels of the switchgear connected to the secondary, it is 
therefore essential for the performance of the VTs (measuring 
and protection) as well as the measuring CT to be limited 
in order to ensure that the transducer operates within the 
precision class for which it was designed. 
Current transformers (TA-I, TA-T, TO) of the inductive type
One important point should be made about the CTs regarding 
the type of construction and the measuring method. This 
refers especially to toroidal CTs, which are CTs to all effects 
and as such must be classified. The CT may be of the 
following types:
– wound type TA-I (as the CTs normally are inside medium 
voltage switchgear) with two terminal blocks of the primary 
circuit and the terminal blocks of the secondary circuit 
exposed to the outside. The primary circuit can in this case 
can even have a number of turns other than 1; 
– TA-T passing bar type in which there is a busbar part 
(generally copper) already embedded in the resin. In this 
case the terminals of the primary winding are the ends of the 
bar, while the ends of the secondary winding are connected 
to external terminals. The number of primary turns in this 
case is always equal to 1;
– toroidal type TO where the primary is not required and it will 
consist of the MV cables that pass through the central hole 
of the CT; the ends of the secondary winding are connected 
to the external terminals. The number of primary turns in 
this case is still generally equal to 1, unless the conductor 
is not passed several times in the CT. These CTs can also 
be constructed as openable types for easy installation in 
existing systems.
28
For all types of CT, the precision classes are similar and 
defined according to the standard.
Depending on how the CT is inserted in the network it can 
perform measurements with varying significance. In particular: 
a CT that is inserted on a single phase (for example, toroidal 
CT that embraces only one phase) measures line currents 
(phase);
a CT that is placed on the three phases (for example toroidal 
CT that encloses the conductors of the three phases) 
measures the vector sum of the currents (in reality the sum of 
the flows) and therefore the homopolar current.
The information provided above indicates that regardless of 
the form of construction, the measurement that is obtained on 
the secondary of CTs depends on how it is inserted into the 
network.
The purpose of the CTs is to translate currents from the power 
circuit to the measuring circuit. The standard classifies them 
into two types:
– measuring CTs to which measuring instruments such as 
ammeters, power meters, converters, etc. are connected;
– protection CTs to whose secondary the protection relays 
are connected This classification is based on independent 
measuring and protection systems. With today's digital 
devices (REF Units) protection and measurement are carried 
out by the same device and separate inputs with different 
characteristics (size, protection) are not provided by the CT. 
Consequently, to implement proper use of digital relays, the 
CTs should be chosen with double precision class, such as:
100/1 - 4 VA - Cl. 0.5 + 5P10
The two precision classes are defined for the different areas of 
operation of the CT and can thus coexist.
As described for CTs, the same reasoning can be applied to 
VTs. Therefore when using digital relays of the RE_ family, a 
VT with a dual precision class should be chosen, for example:
6000: / 100:  - 10 VA - Cl. 0.5 + 3P
Metering CT
An essential factor in choosing the characteristics of 
measuring CTs is that the precision class is guaranteed for 
secondary loads 25% higher than the rated performance. 
When the instrumentation was electromechanical it was 
therefore logical to purchase CTs with high performance, 
but today, with digital instruments, CTs with truly limited 
performance (typically 5, maximum 10 VA) can be purchased.
An essential feature of measuring CTs is saturation for 
currents slightly above the nominal primary current, to 
guarantee protection of the instruments (typically able to 
withstand a maximum of 20 In for 0.5 seconds) in the event of 
a short circuit. For measuring CTs, according to the standard, 
a safety factor (Fs) must therefore be defined such that, 
for currents higher than Fs x In, the CT is safely saturated 
(consequently protecting the secondary circuit).
In reality, the CT is not loaded on the secondary up to its 
rated performance but to a lower load. The real safety factor 
(F’s) is therefore greater than the rated factor and a check is 
essential to ensure that the instrumentation connected to the 
secondary circuit is adequately protected.
The real safety limit factor can be calculated with the following 
relationship:
STA + SN
STA + STRUE
F’S = FS
 .
F’S  =  real safety factor on the real secondary load;
FS =  rated safety factor of the CT;
SN  =  rated performance of the CT;
STA  =  internal consumption of the CT = R TA x I2N
2 ;
I2N  =  rated secondary current of the CT;
RTA  =  secondary resistance of the CT at 75°C;
STRUE  =  true load on the secondary of the  CT= I 2N
2 x 
(RINSTRUMENTS  + Rc);
RC  =  resistance of the wiring circuit;
RINSTRUMENTS  = load (internal consumption) of the 
instrumentation connected to the CT secondary.
4.  Sizing and choice of equipment and 
components
29
Protection CT
The CTs that are associated with the protections have the 
peculiarity of not saturating until the tripping of the protection 
is guaranteed for the maximum short-circuit current. The 
parameter in protection CTs that defines the value within which 
the response is linear is the precision limit factor (FL), usually 
equal to 10-15-20 or even greater.
In choosing the characteristics of the protection CT 
(performance and precision limit factor) the following 
conditions must be met:
– the performance of the CT must be greater than the 
secondary load (relay and wiring);
– the CTs to be associated with overcurrent protections 
should not saturate until their safe operation is guaranteed. 
Generally for ABB relays it can be assumed that the satura-
tion should be at least twice the set value with a minimum of 
20 In, but precise values can be found in the catalogues for 
the various types of relays;
– the CTs to be associated with special protections such as 
differential relays, distance measuring relays, etc. must have 
a safety factor defined on a case by case basis and pro-
vided in the catalogues for the relays;
– the CTs must saturate for appropriate current values in 
order to read overcurrents correctly and at the same time to 
preserve the relays and the secondary circuits in the event of 
a short circuit. Overcurrent relays typically have a tolerability 
of 100 In for 1 second and peak 250 In, but more precise 
values can be found in the catalogues for the various relays.
The last condition is not generally given much consideration 
and can result in serious damage to components if not 
checked.
As for the safety limit factor for measuring CTs, also for 
protection CTs the real precision limit factor must be calculated 
according to the load actually connected to the secondary, 
and can be calculated using the following relationship:
STA + SN
STA + STRUE
F’L = FL     
F’L  = real precision limit factor for the real secondary load;
FL = rated precision limit factor of the CT;
SN  = Rated performance of the CT;
STA  = internal consumption of the CT = R TA x I2N
2 ;
I2N  = rated secondary current of the CT;
RTA  = secondary resistance of the CT at 75°C;
STRUE  = true load on the secondary of the    
CT  =  I2N
2 x (R RELAY + RC);
RC  = resistance of the wiring circuit;
RRELAY  = load (internal consumption) of the relays connected 
to the CT.
The CT saturates for currents below the withstand of the 
instruments connected to the secondary and is therefore 
adequately sized.
Example 2
CT 100/1 - Cl. 0.5 - 10 VA - F S = 10 - R TA = 0.8 ohm
The real secondary load is 1.1 VA or 11.5% of the rated 
performance, and therefore the precision class is not 
guaranteed. The value of the real safety factor is: 
STA + SN
STA  + STRUE
STA + SN
STA + STRUE
F’S = FS 
.
  
F’S = FS 
.
  
= 5 .
= 10 .
= 12.6
= 57
0.8 + 4
0.8 + 1.1
0.8 + 10
0.8 + 1.1
The CT saturates for currents higher than the withstand of 
the instruments connected to the secondary, and therefore 
in the event of a short-circuit on the network the instruments 
could be destroyed and the secondary circuit could be 
opened as a result with serious risk to the safety of personnel 
(overvoltages). It is therefore evident that all the secondaries 
of the measuring CTs should be carefully sized in order to 
avoid serious damage to the system in the case of a fault and 
to obtain measurements in the required precision class.
Two examples may be of help in selecting the characteristics 
of the measuring CTs and in highlighting the errors that can 
be made in the case of oversizing.
Consider a CT with a 100/1 ratio and with a secondary load 
consisting of an ammeter (internal consumption 0.5 VA) and 
a multifunction converter (internal consumption 0.5 VA). 
Resistance of the secondary circuit between the terminals of 
the CT and the instrumentation 0.1 ohms.
Example 1
CT 100/1 - Cl. 0.5 - 4 VA - F S = 5 - R TA = 0.8 ohm
The real secondary load is 1.1 VA or 27.5% of the rated 
performance, and therefore the precision class is guaranteed. 
The value of the real safety factor is:
30
if the secondary load is greater than 25 % of the rated 
performance. It is not easy to ensure that a VT will operates 
in precision class when instrumentation (relay or measuring 
instruments) with internal consumption in the order of 
fractions of VA is connected to the secondary.
The use of ballast loads (resistance) to be inserted in the 
secondary of VTs when these have been chosen with 
performance that is too high in order to ensure the precision 
class has two drawbacks:
– an element is added to the circuit (which may also be a 
protection circuit) that can fail and that therefore reduces 
the overall reliability of the system;
– a heating element is added in the measuring cell of the 
switchgear with obvious issues of heat extraction.
The selection of VTs must also take account of any 
ferroresonance. The phenomenon of ferroresonance is a 
typical aspect of VTs inserted on networks in a cable with 
isolated neutral or not effectively earthed. The capacity of the 
cable, together with the inductance of the VTs, constitutes 
an oscillating circuit (RLC). Conditions can therefore arise 
on the circuit as a result of which the circuit itself resonates 
(capacitive reactance=saturated inductive reactance of the 
VT) and, even though the cause that provoked the saturation 
ceases (for example an earth fault), a transient oscillation (at 
a frequency that is a several times that of the network) of 
reactive energy persists caused by the components of the 
oscillating circuit. Because of the frequency of this oscillation, 
a permanent and high circulation of current is produced in 
the primary winding only. Since this is only a magnetizing 
current, the secondary winding is barely affected, resulting in 
high heating on the primary but negligible on the secondary. 
The abnormal heating of the windings always produces a 
strong internal pressure resulting in breakage of the outer 
housing. The precautions to be taken to avoid ferroresonance 
phenomena are primarily:
– increase the magnetization impedance of the VT;
– use VTs that work with induction lower than that 
recommended;
– use VTs with highly permeable plates;
– insert damping resistances (or in any case devices with 
nonlinear resistance) in series with the secondary windings 
connected in an open delta (the voltage relay must be 
connected in parallel to the anti-ferroresonance resistance). 
– use the ABB VT Guard Pro device connected to the open 
delta, which increases resistance as the voltage increases.
STA + SN
STA + STRUE
STA + SN
STA  + STRUE
F’L = FL
 .
    
F’L = FL  
.
   
= 10
= 20
= 50.5
= 227
0.8 + 4
0.8 + 0.15
0.8 + 10
0.8 + 0.15
The CT saturates for a sufficiently high current for overcurrent 
protection (maximum relay adjustment generally not more than 
20 In). The relay and the entire secondary circuit (terminals 
and wiring) are adequately protected against very high short-
circuit currents.
Example 2
CT 100/1 – 10 VA – 5P20 - R TA = 0.8 ohm
The value of the real precision limit factor is:
If the CT is inserted in a circuit in which the short circuit 
current is high (for example, 31.5 kA switchgear), in the 
event of a short circuit instead of the protection to control 
the opening of the switch tripping, the relay will probably be 
destroyed, with the consequences that one can imagine. 
It is therefore evident that, as also for protection CTs, every 
secondary should be carefully calculated to avoid serious 
damage in the installation in the event of a fault and to 
guarantee safe protection of the underlying portion of the 
network.
As is the case for measuring CTs, two examples can be 
significant for checking the characteristics of protection 
CTs. Consider a CT with a 100/1 ratio with a secondary 
load consisting of an overcurrent relay (internal consumption 
0.05 VA). Resistance of the secondary circuit between the 
terminals of the CT and relay 0.1 ohm, therefore the real 
secondary load is 0.15 VA.
Example 1
CT 100/1 – 4 VA – 5P10 - R TA= 0.8 ohm
The value of the real precision limit factor is:
Inductive voltage transformers (TV-I)
For voltage transformers, for both measuring instruments 
and protection relays, the same rule as for measuring CTs 
applies in relation to the range within which the precision 
class is guaranteed: the precision class is guaranteed only 
4.  Sizing and choice of equipment and 
components
31
Non-inductive current and voltage sensors (TA-NI, TV-NI)
Since the power absorbed by the devices that are connected 
on the secondary circuit is extremely reduced it is no longer 
necessary to have magnetic circuits for the coupling between 
primary and secondary circuits. Therefore current sensors 
or air CTs (Rogowsky coil) and voltage sensors (voltage 
dividers) were developed that eliminate the negative aspects 
of inductive transformers (hysteresis loop). Reference is made 
in particular to:
– saturation: with current sensors the phenomenon of 
saturation does not exist (there is no iron) and there the 
definition of the precision limit factor is no longer a problem;
– performance: we have seen in the examples above that 
it is difficult to reconcile the performance of measuring 
transformers with loads connected to the secondary. 
In fact, the need to have at least 25% of load to ensure 
precision is no longer a problem;
– primary rated currents and voltages: the linearity of 
response allows 95% of applications to be covered with 
only two or three types of transducer, with considerable 
advantages for the standardization of the cells of the 
switchgear and the possibility of their rapid conversion;
– it is no longer necessary to have a measuring CT or VT and/
or protection CT or VT because the precision is constant 
and there is no longer the problem of saturation.
The Reference standards (currently being revised) for current 
and voltage sensors are:
– CEI EN 60044-8: Measuring transformers, Part 8: Electronic 
current transformers
– CEI EN 60044-7: Measuring transformers, Part 7: Electronic 
voltage transformers
In the past, for measurement of homopolar voltages 
(necessary for identifying earth faults) a secondary set of 
VTs connected in an open delta was used. In modern digital 
switchgear it is no longer necessary to provide this secondary 
of the VTs because the homopolar voltage (vector sum of the 
three phase voltages) is calculated inside the actual relay (the 
signal coming from an open delta secondary often has lower 
precision).
For current sensors or air CTs, the main feature is that they 
are transformers in which the magnetic circuit is replaced 
by air. A particular characteristic of these types of CTs is 
that the secondary signal is not proportional to the primary 
quantity, but to its derivative (which, if properly integrated 
in the devices connected to the secondary, allows current 
measurement to be obtained). As already noted, there are no 
saturation phenomena but, as a negative aspect, there is in 
general the precision class that at the current design stage 
does not attain the characteristics that can be achieved for 
inductive measuring CTs.
For voltage sensors the main feature is the absence of the 
ferroresonance phenomenon (obviously, since there iron is 
not present anymore). This is a significant advantage where 
networks operated with isolated neutral are still used. As for 
the air CTs, also for the voltage dividers (VTs), at the current 
state of the technology, the precision class has not yet 
reached that of inductive VTs.
ABB circuit-breakers of the VD4/R and HD4/R series can be 
equipped with two or three current sensors; three current 
sensors are required to perform the functions of protection 
against homopolar instantaneous overcurrent and homopo-
lar inverse time overcurrent for the vector sum of the phase 
currents; if these functions are performed with an external 
toroidal current transformer, only two current sensors can 
be installed; the external toroidal transformer is available on 
request.
The current sensors are the air type previously (Rogowsky 
coils) encapsulated in epoxy resin.
32
The Standard CEI 99-4 reiterates that each circuit equipped 
with a circuit-breaker must be equipped with overcurrent 
protection devices that act on the opening command of the 
circuit-breaker. Protective devices may be:
– direct relays mounted on board the circuit-breaker and 
powered directly from the primary current (not used in 
medium voltage)
– indirect relays without auxiliary power
– indirect relays with auxiliary power
The overcurrent relays must be selected taking into account 
the characteristics of the circuit to be protected and the 
selective coordination of the protections; if the Distributor 
requires a protection with instantaneous tripping, it may be 
impossible to achieve selective coordination of the protections 
as part of the internal MV distribution network (if present) 
due to instantaneous tripping of the main circuit-breaker. In 
this case, however, it is possible to limit disruption resulting 
from a fault in the internal network by adopting, for instance, 
a suitable distribution scheme (e.g. double radial, open ring) 
and appropriate devices to identify the faulty section or to 
implement current selectivity with the LV network.
The Standard CEI 0-16 introduced general rules for protection 
of the connection between Users and Distributors.
The standard also defines the corresponding features and 
settings in detail. The protections provided on the connection 
point between Users and Distributors are not intended to 
protect the equipment and systems, but are only used to 
define the contractual values above which the User must 
disconnect from the Distributor's network.
Therefore the installation of a protection device on the delivery 
point is not a guarantee of adequate protection of the network 
downstream.
In general, the protection system must provide at least the 
following functions:
– phase overcurrent protection phase with three thresholds:
 - first threshold with a characteristic of very inverse time trip 
for overload protection (I>);
 - second threshold to identify minor multi-phase short-
circuit faults in the User network (I>>);
 - second threshold to identify multi-phase short-circuit 
faults in the User network (I>>>);
– homopolar overcurrent (or earth) protection: this protection 
can be implemented in two different ways depending on 
the capacitive contribution of the User network to the 
Distributor. In particular, if the contribution of the User 
network to the Distributor is less than 80% of the value 
required by the Distributor, the protection may be of 
the non-directional type, otherwise must necessarily be 
directional (with activation direction for currents flowing 
from the Distributor to the User network).
– For networks with capacitive contribution less than or 
equal to 80% of the imposed setting, two maximum 
homopolar current thresholds are required with the following 
characteristics:
 - first threshold with characteristic of defined time tripping 
to identify single-phase earth faults in the User network 
user (Io>);
 - second threshold with characteristic of defined time 
tripping to identify double single-phase earth faults in the 
User network user (Io>>);
– For networks with capacitive contribution greater than 80% 
of the imposed setting, three maximum homopolar current 
thresholds are required with the following characteristics:
 - first threshold of directional type with characteristic of 
defined time tripping to identify single-phase earth faults 
in the User network with  a compensated neutral system 
(Io-> the Standard calls it 67N.S1);
 - second threshold of directional type with characteristic of 
defined time tripping to identify single-phase earth faults in 
the User network with an isolated neutral system (Io-> the 
Standard calls it 67N.S2);
 - third threshold of non-directional type with characteristic 
of defined time tripping to identify double single-phase 
earth faults in the User network user (Io>>);
5.  Protection relay
33
I> Phase overcurrent protection: first threshold (optional 
activation)
To be agreed with the Distributer
I>> Phase overcurrent protection: second threshold < 250 A, overcurrent extinction time < 500 ms 
I>>> Phase overcurrent protection: third threshold < 600 A, overcurrent extinction time < 120 ms
Io> Homopolar overcurrent protection first threshold (used only 
in the absence of the 67N) 
For networks with isolated neutral < 2 A, fault extinction time < 170 ms
For networks with compensated neutral < 2 A, fault extinction time < 450 ms
Io>> Homopolar overcurrent protection   
For networks with isolated neutral (used only with 67N present). 
S2)
value 140% of the single-phase earth fault specified by the Distributer; 
fault extinction time: < 170 ms
For networks with compensated neutral (always present also 
with 67N)
value 140% of the single-phase earth fault specified by the Distributer 
(typically, 70 A for networks at 20 kV and 56 A for networks at 15 kV); 
fault extinction time: < 170 ms
Io->
S1 
Directional earth protection threshold 67N.S1 (earth fault 
selection in a compensated neutral system)
Io: 2 A, Uo: 5 V; tripping sector (delay of Io compared to Uo): 
60° ÷ 250°; 
fault extinction time: < 450 ms;
Io-> 
S2
Directional earth protection threshold 67N.S2 (earth fault 
selection in an isolated neutral system)
Io: 2 A, Uo: 2 V; tripping sector (delay of Io compared to Uo): 
60° ÷ 120°;
fault extinction time: 170 ms;
In order to understand when the 67N is necessary you can 
proceed as indicated below. 
In the case of systems with isolated neutral, it is possible to 
determine the value (in Amperes) of the single-phase earth 
fault conventionally, according to the following empirical 
formula:
IF = U (0,003 L 1 + 0.2 L 2) 
Where:
U is the rated voltage between the phases of the network in kV:
L1  is the sum of the lengths in km of the overhead lines and
L2  is the sum of the lengths in km of the cable lines, under 
normal conditions, connected with each other metallically 
during operation of the network.
The above formula is approximate; more precise values can 
be calculated according to the Standard CEI EN 60909 (CEI 
11-25). 
In the case of a system with neutral earthed through 
impedance, the value of the single-phase earth fault 
current is independent of the size of the MV network and is 
conventionally defined by the Distributor.
In any case, as an example, since the required calibration of 
the protection is usually 2A, we apply the formula using this 
value, and therefore 80% of 2 A gives 1.6A (Io). Furthermore, 
in small to medium industrial and service sector installations 
there are no overhead lines, and therefore the formula can be 
further simplified: 
in other words, I F = 0.2 U L.
Therefore. we have: 
L= IF / (0.2 U) and lastly replacing Io for I F: L = 1.6 / (0.2 U)
By applying the formula we find out we will have to adopt the 
67N protection:
– with mains voltage of 20 kV for MV cable > 400m
– with mains voltage of 15 kV for MV cable lines > 533m
For other mains voltage values the maximum length can again 
be calculated using the formula above.
The standard also specifies some typical settings for the 
protections on the basis of which a number of considerations 
can be made.
The minimum indicated settings are:
34
As an alternative to the settings described above, for Users of 
compensated neutral systems that do not require 67N.S1 and 
67N.S2 protections, the threshold Io> can simply be used, 
with the following settings: value 2 A; fault extinction time: 
170 ms.
Please note: by overcurrent extinction time (fault extinction 
time), we mean the sum of the tripping time of the protection, 
the opening time of the circuit-breaker until complete 
extinction of the current. So in calculating the protection 
settings the opening time of the circuit-breaker (typically 60-
70 ms) must be subtracted.
The settings shown, which must however be agreed on a 
case by case basis, show that it is in general possible to 
achieve good and selective protection only for earth faults 
in a compensated neutral system, while for earth faults in 
an isolated neutral system or in the case of multi-phase 
short circuits (two-phase, earthed or otherwise, and three-
phase) the selectivity between MV protections within the User 
network is practically impossible (given the operation time of 
the circuit-breakers).
The rule provides that in special cases logical selectivity can 
also be used, but this has to be agreed between User and 
Distributor.
Another protection function required by CEI 0-16 that must 
be provided in some installations is minimum voltage, which 
has, however, an application of automatism rather than a true 
protective application. Where the total power of transformers 
that can be remagnetized simultaneously following a power 
failure (if the circuit-breakers remain closed) is greater than 
the value specified in the standard, a disconnection must be 
performed, followed by reinsertion in steps to prevent inrush 
currents that are too high causing the overcurrent protections 
not equipped with the ‘magnetization lock’ function to trip.
Given the critical nature in the coupling between the current 
transformers and relays, the adoption of integrated relay/CT 
solutions as in the case of ABB circuit-breakers of the VD4/R 
and HD4/R series can eliminate the risks of making a wrong 
choice. Not surprisingly, the standard recommends paying 
particular attention to the coordination between current 
transformers and relays.
Where indirect relays are used with auxiliary power supply 
there must be an independent source (usually an accumulator 
battery) available that will guarantee power supply even in the 
event of a failure. Furthermore, the lack of auxiliary source 
must be properly signalled.
In transformer substations for the connection of MV Passive 
Users to the Distributor's network, ABB offers the REF 601, 
CEI version (protections and trip curves complying with 
CEI 0-16, with thresholds that can be set in accordance 
with ENEL specification DK 5600). The available protection 
functions are: 
– overcurrent protection (ANSI code 50 - 51), two-phase or 
three-phase depending on whether two or three current 
sensors are connected
– homopolar earth fault protection (ANSI code 50N - 51N) by 
means of the internal vector sum of the three phase sensors 
or by means of the external earth fault toroid and two or 
three current sensors
– detection of the magnetizing current of a three-phase 
transformer to prevent untimely tripping on switch-in (ANSI 
code 68).
The device can operate with up to 3 inputs from TA-NI current 
sensors of the Rogowsky coil type.
The current sensors are available in an integrated version 
with KEVCR24 OC2 circuit-breakers. If a homopolar sensor is 
required in the CEI 0-16 kit, the TO11S3 or TO21S3 models 
(110 mm or 210 mm hole) are provided. 
5.  Protection relay
35
The protections installed are:
– Protection against overload I> (51)
– Protection with delay against the multi-phase short circuit I>> 
(51)
– Instantaneous protection against the multi-phase short circuit 
I>>> (50)
– Protection against single-phase earth fault Io> (51N)
– Protection against single-phase double earth fault Io>> (50N)
Other important features of the REF 601, are:
– pushbuttons for the circuit-breaker's local switching 
operations (opening and closing pushbutton. The lateral 
operation mechanism is always supplied with a shunt 
opening release. Application of the shunt closing release 
must obviously be requested to operate the closing 
command via REF 601).
– 5 separate indicators: “relay operating”, “relay at tripping 
threshold”, “relay tripped”, “relay tripped due to phase 
overcurrent”, “relay tripped due to earth fault overcurrent”
– HMI consisting of an LCD display and “arrow”, “enter” 
and “esc” keys for user-friendly browsing amongst the 
“measuring”, “date recording”, “event recording”, “settings”, 
“configuration” and “test” menus
– three User levels with different operations allowed and two 
passwords
–  continuous display of the current in the most loaded phase 
and the earth current
–  recording of the values of the currents that caused the 
device to trip
–  storage of the number of openings caused by the device
–  event recording (storage of the previously described 
parameters in the last 5 tripping actions of the device) in a 
non-volatile memory
– circuit-breaker opening by means of the undervoltage 
release (CEI 0-16 version)
– multi-voltage 24...240 V AC/DC power supply.
The REF601 can also be installed on board the switchgear. In 
this case the following kit of components is required:
– REF601 
– TA-NI CEI 0-16 toroidal sensors to be mounted on a cable 
(KECA 250 B1) 
– homopolar sensor TO CEI 0-16 TO11S3 or TO21S3 
– power failure release.
If a more sophisticated general protection is required, the 
REF 542plus can be used. This device is extremely versatile 
and can be used for the protection of any type of load (line, 
transformer, motor, ...), it can perform functions of automation 
and control at the level of functional unit and the switchgear, 
and provides a graphical interface for viewing the state and 
commanding the circuit-breaker.
In the CEI 0-16 base version the device consists of:
– 1 110 V DC fixed voltage power supply
– 1 main board module
– 1 binary input output module (14 inputs, 8 outputs, 1 
watchdog)
– 1 analog input module for 3 current sensors, 3 voltage 
sensors, 1 homopolar current sensor
– 1 HMI interface unit and cable for connection to the base 
unit
– 1 connection kit for wiring the unit inside the panel.
36
Given the great versatility, several additional configurations are 
available on request to meet every need. 
The software configurations that can be downloaded to the 
device are of two types:
Configuration A, without directional earth protections. This 
configuration is suitable for simple installations, characterized 
by the absence of overhead lines, the limited extent of the 
cable lines and installation of all the MV/LV transformers in a 
single User room.
The protections installed are:
– Protection against overload I> (51)
– Protection with delay against the multi-phase short circuit I>> 
(51)
– Instantaneous protection against the multi-phase short circuit 
I>>> (50)
– Protection against single-phase earth fault Io> (51N)
– Protection against single-phase double earth fault Io>> (50N)
– Optionally, the undervoltage protection 27 for the disconnection 
of additional transformers.
Since directional protections are not required, voltage 
measurements are not necessary.
In this case, the KIT consists of the following:
– REF542plus unit
– 3 current sensors of the type KECA for measurement of the 
phase 1 currents
– 1 homopolar earth sensor of the type TO11S3 or TO21S3 
for measuring the earth current.
Configuration B, with directional earth protections used in 
the other cases, again for Passive Users.
The protections installed are:
– Protection against overload I> (51)
– Protection with delay against the multi-phase short circuit 
I>> (51)
– Instantaneous protection against the multi-phase short 
circuit I>>> (50)
– Protection against single-phase earth fault Io>> (50N)
– Directional protection against earth faults for compensated 
neutral 67N NC
– Directional protection against earth faults for isolated 
neutral 67N NI
– Optionally, the undervoltage protection 27 for the 
disconnection of additional transformers.
The directional earth protections require measurement of 
the voltages for calculation of the residual voltage; in this 
case, therefore, combined voltage and current sensors 
(combisensors) are used in the kit. The KIT consists of the 
following:
– REF542plus unit
– 3 combisensors of the type KEVCD 24 AE3 for the 
measurement of the phase currents and phase voltages.
– 1 homopolar earth sensor of the type TO11S3 or TO21S3 
for measuring the earth current.
5.  Protection relay
37
PG
DG SPG DG DG SPGSPG
B
A
TO
TO
TA-I
TV-NITV-I
TA-NI
The MV switchgear must contain the previously described 
devices safely according to the product standard CEI EN 
62271-200. The switchgear must be located in the User room 
of the electrical substation and is therefore one of the most 
important elements for the physical sizing of the structure.
The configuration of the MV switchgear, in addition to 
containing the input of the connection cable and the DG, 
depends on the wiring diagram of the User installation. 
6.1 Diagram of the user 
installation 
The scheme to be adopted in general for the users for the MV 
switchgear immediately downstream of the connecting cable 
is shown in the following figure. Depending on the protections 
requirements, the scheme must be completed with a set of 
transformers/transducers that may be of the type TV-I or TV-
NI.
6.  Diagram of user system for 
connection and MV switchgear
The dashed VT branched on the busbar, indicated by B, is an 
alternative to the recommended solution indicated by A.
As you can tell from the previous figure, the ideal positioning 
of the homopolar toroid TO is upstream of the DG; the ideal 
solution both for the inductive CTs and VTs and for the 
non-inductive transducers is to position them immediately 
downstream of the DG.
It is also allowed to position the TV-I upstream of the circuit-
breaker or of the phase CTs, but in this case they must be 
protected, on the MV side, with an IMS combined with fuses 
(In ≤ 6.3 A) to protect the primary of the TV-Is. It must be 
highlighted that the tripping of any primary fuses and/or 
protections of the secondary circuit must in any case cause 
the DG to open, or switching of the function of protection 
67N (directional protection for earth faults) to 51N (homopolar 
overcurrent protection), keeping the same set values relating 
to homopolar current tripping thresholds, and restoring the 
67N protection in the shortest possible time so as to avoid 
accidental tripping in the event of single-phase earth fault 
external to the User network. If instead the VTs are branched 
downstream of a DG and phase CT, there are no constraints 
on the primary protection of the actual VTs. Lastly, the TV-NIs 
do not require protection on the MV side. 
Connection cable
Distributor Distributor
User UserUser
Distributor
Disconnector 
optional
TO
Phase CT
For the remaining user installation
DG = General Device
SPG = General Protection System
38
PG PG
C
A B
TO
6.  Diagram of user system for 
connection and MV switchgear
The standard provides for a second case: in an MV installation 
with only two MV risers, it is possible to omit the General 
Device (DG) where the functions normally attributed to the 
DG are accomplished by the circuit-breakers joined to the 
User busbar (general line devices). As regards the connection 
cable, in such a configuration this cable is meant to terminate 
on the terminals of upstream of the first disconnector as 
shown in the following figure:
The dashed VT branched on the busbar, indicated by C, is an 
alternative to the solution indicated by A and B.
For this type of installation, the following conditions must be 
met:
– single MV switchgear (excluding open structures);
– no additional equipment apart from the two MV risers with 
circuit-breaker indicated.  
In this case what was said about the first scheme about the 
position of the TV-Is also applies where necessary for the 
operation of the 67N protection.
In this second type, regarding the security function one must 
consider that the protections I>, I >> of the User installation 
are implemented with the relays that equip all the riser 
devices, but requiring the sum of the thresholds for each 
relay to respect the constraints imposed by the Distributor or 
summing the secondary signals of the phase CTs of the two 
risers. 
The main disconnector (if installed) must be interlocked with 
the “open” position of both circuit breakers downstream, or 
otherwise must be a switch-disconnector.
The short-circuit protection (I >>>) is instead normally set on 
the short-circuit fault current of each riser. 
Caution! Where this solution is used with the two transformers 
in parallel on the LV side, in order to avoid having voltage on 
the MV side of a transformer due to the parallel connection on 
the LV, appropriate interlocks will be required between the MV 
and LV circuit-breakers of each transformer . 
Connection cable
Disconnector 
optional
Disconnector 
optional 
Signalling
with flag relay
(optional) 
Homopolar CT Homopolar CT
Phase CT
Phase CT
For the remaining user installation
39

40
6.2  MV switchgear solutions
Now let's look at a real-world solution; in the first case 
examined in the previous paragraph, that is, incoming from 
the Distributor and a single transformer in the substation, we 
can see the ABB solution (Figure a) with UniSec switchgear 
consisting of: 
– 1 HBC unit with HySec multifunction device + # 1 RLC 
cable entry unit to the left
– Voltage present on the busbar side and on the cable side
– HySec p230 multifunction device comprising:
 – Vacuum circuit-breaker with or without motorization 
 – Disconnector in SF 6 
– REF 601 protection relay without communication (51, I>; 
51, I>>; 50, I>>>; 51N, Io>; 50N, Io>>,68) with 3 current 
sensors and toroid for earth fault, conforming to the 
Standard CEI 0-16
– Setup for earthing by means of insulating rod on the busbar 
side.
6.  Diagram of user system for 
connection and MV switchgear
41
190 500 750 500 50027 27 27
2000
1700
As regards the second case indicated by the standard, in the 
following example we consider UniSec switchgear (Figure b) 
comprising:
1 incoming line with SBR Unit (Incoming unit CEI 0-16)
– Voltage present on the busbar side and on the cable side
– VD4/R-Sec p230 circuit-breaker with or without 
motorization
– REF542plus protection and control unit (51, I>; 51, I>>; 50, 
I>>>; 51N, Io>; 50N, Io>>; 67NI; 67NC) with Data Logger 
and 3 ABB current/voltage sensors of the KEVCD type 
mounted inside the busbar compartment and toroid for 
earth faults conforming to Standard CEI 0-16
– GSEC disconnector
– Earthing switch with key on the Distributor side that is the 
responsibility of the Distributor, according to Standard CEI 
0-16
2 Transformer protections with HBC Unit
– Presence of voltage on the cable side.
– HySec p230 multifunction switchgear consisting of:
 - Vacuum circuit-breaker with or without motorization 
 - Disconnector in SF 6 
– REF 601 protection relay without communication (51, I>; 
51, I>>; 50, I>>>; 51N, Io>; 50N, Io>>,68) with 3 current 
sensors and toroid for earth fault, conforming to the 
Standard.
Figure a Figure b
42
7.1 Main characteristics
The transformer is the most important part of the transformer 
substation. The choice of transformer affects the design of 
the substation and is made on the basis of several factors, 
primarily:
– Characteristics of the User installation
– Level of continuity of service required 
– Location of the electrical substation
Some important characteristics must therefore be considered 
and defined according to the product standard CEI EN 60076:
– Type of transformer, for example with n separate windings 
or autotransformer, etc.
– Single-phase or three-phase
– Frequency
– Dry or in insulating liquid, and in the latter case what kind of 
liquid (oil, natural or synthetic liquid, etc.)
– For internal or external
– Rated power for each winding
– Nominal voltage for each winding (and therefore the 
transformation ratio)
– Type of cooling
– Presence of load or no-load tap-changer
– Earthing connections and method for each winding
Other data will have to be defined or clarified with the 
manufacturer:
– short circuit voltage percentage Ucc%
– no-load current percentage Io% 
– losses in the copper at rated current Pcu and losses in the 
iron at nominal voltage Pfe
– no-load current
– CEI connection assembly, conventionally indicated by a 
number that, when multiplied by 30, gives the value of the 
phase voltage delay angle on the LV side compared with the 
MV side.
7.  Power transformers
43
IBT
IMT
L1 L2
Depending on the type of cooling the transformers are 
identified as follows:
AN  cooling with natural air circulation;
AF  cooling with forced air circulation;
ONAN  cooling with natural circulation of oil and air;
ONAF  cooling natural circulation of oil and forced circulation 
of air; 
OFAF  cooling with forced circulation of oil and air.
The most frequently chosen types are AN and ONAN 
because since the substations are never manned, it is not 
recommended to use machines that use fans or oil circulators.
On the other hand, the Distributor, when requesting 
connection, must specify the limit for the maximum power 
of a single transformer or several transformers in parallel 
on the same LV busbar referring to the typical short-circuit 
voltages specified in Standard CEI EN 60076-5 (UDC = 6% 
for transformers with rated power greater than 630 kVA),
that the User can install in his own system in order to avoid 
the tripping of the overcurrent protection installed on the MV 
line that powers it in the event of a short circuit on the LV 
transformer busbars.
This limit on maximum power (specified by the Distributor) 
is normally 2000 kVA (20 kV networks) and 1600 kVA (15 kV 
networks).
It is normally required that the customer should use MV/LV 
transformers with:
– delta primary, (∆ ) since with this type of connection the 
third harmonics of the magnetizing current (distorted by the 
non-linearity of the magnetic circuit) and any homopolar 
load currents are free to circulate in the sides in the triangle 
without flowing into the network; the magnetic flows 
remain sinusoidal and consequently also the EMFs induced 
on the secondary. Furthermore, if there are unbalanced 
loads on the secondary, the reaction current retrieved 
on the primary will circulate only in the corresponding 
winding without affecting the other two; if this happened, 
as in a star connection, the currents in these windings 
would be magnetizing and would cause asymmetry in the 
phase voltages. Only when special applications (welding 
machines, actuators, etc.) are supported, the connection 
might not be triangular, agreeing on the choice with the 
Distributor.
– earthed star secondary, (  ) to to make phase-to-
phase voltages and phase voltages easily available, but 
above all for reasons of safety, since in the event of a fault 
between the medium and low voltage, the voltage delivered 
to the secondary will remain close to the phase value, thus 
guaranteeing greater safety for persons and preserving 
insulation.
The transformer is connected to the sampling point of the 
delivery room through the MV switchgear and the copper 
connection cable, which must have a minimum cross section 
of 95mm 2 regardless of the power supplied. This cable is 
the property of the User and must be as short as possible 
(maximum 20 m including terminations). If the delivery 
and User rooms are not adjacent or actually in separate 
structures, it is allowed to derogate from this requirement 
as long as a single-length cable is used with additional 
mechanical protection (see Standard CEI 11-17) but with the 
prior consent of the Distributor. 
In general, the choice of the number of transformers to 
be installed depends on installation considerations on the 
reliability and flexibility required in using electrical energy. It 
can be stated that for the request of small power installations 
(indicatively up to 630kVA - 800kVA), a single transformer 
can be installed, whereas for higher power (indicatively up to 
1000kVA - 2000kVA) it is convenient to split the power over 
multiple units in parallel.
From an installation point of view, the simplest substation 
will have only one MV/LV transformer; this solution is simple 
and economic, but not flexible because the downtime or 
maintenance on a component requires disconnection of the 
entire system.
MV line
44
IBT1
IBT1
IBT2
IBT2
I
L1
L1
L2
L2
IGMT
IGMT
L3
L3
IMT1
IMT1
IMT2
IMT2
IBT1 IBT2
CBT
I
L1 L2 L3
IGMT
IMT1 IMT2
L4 L5 L6
If the continuity of service required justifies it, a more 
expensive but more flexible solution consists in having a 
second transformer as a backup to the first one. 
In this case the two LV circuit-breakers are interlocked to 
prevent operation in parallel. Obviously, in addition to the 
switching and disconnect device on the incoming MV line 
it is convenient to also provide a switching, disconnection 
and protection device on the individual MV risers of the two 
transformers (I MT1 e IMT2).
In this way when the device upstream and downstream of a 
transformer is opened it is possible to guarantee isolation and 
to access the machine without putting the entire substation 
out of service. 
A further possibility, again where the aggregate power of 
2000 kVA at 20kV and 1600 kVA at 15 kV is not exceeded, it 
that of managing the two transformers in parallel. The parallel 
operation of the transformers generates greater problems in 
network management. In fact, the outage of a machine might 
require a certain flexibility in load management, ensuring 
that power is supplied to those considered a priority through 
appropriate automation. This solution is simple, relatively 
cheap and flexible. 
Finally, the last feasible configuration is also the one that 
offers the most flexibility. It is primarily use is in installations 
that require high continuity of service. Maintenance of the 
transformer risers and portions of the installation is possible 
while continuing to operate the remaining portion. From a 
cost perspective, in addition to the second transformer a 
coupler has to be inserted in the LV switchgear for parallel 
management. If the system is to operate with the coupler 
closed, the limits imposed by the Distributor must be 
respected; conversely, an appropriate interlock must be 
introduced that will prevent the coupler from being closed 
when both incoming circuit-breakers from the transformer 
are closed in order to avoid the parallel operation in question. 
This mode of management, for the same power of the 
installed transformers, makes it possible to have a lower 
value for the short-circuit current on the busbar. In other 
words, each transformer establishes the short-circuit level 
for its corresponding busbar without having to consider 
7.  Power transformers
45
In practice, the table gives the ratio K i between the rated 
current of the transformer (i oi) and the maximum peak value of 
the inrush current (I Tn ) based on the power of the transformer 
and the time constant T i of the inrush current. In the graph, 
however, we find the setting of the MV overcurrent relay on 
the primary of the transformer in order to avoid it tripping on 
power-up; the curve separates the field of possible tripping 
of the relay (on the left of the curve) from that certain non-
tripping (on the right of the curve), where: 
tr  = delay time setting
I’r  = setting of the threshold in current (primary value).
To understand how to use the table and the graph, we also 
provide the following example:
Transformer data: 800 kVA; 15 kV; I Tn = 30.8 A
In the table we find: 
Ki = 10; i oi = 10 * 30.8 = 308 A; T i = 0.3 s.
Assuming I’ r = 50 A we get I’r/i oi =50 / 308 = 0.16
Finally, at this value on the curve we find 
tr/Ti = 1.45, in other words t r = 1.45 *0.3 = 0.44 s, which is 
the minimum delay time to avoid unwanted tripping.
the contribution of other machines. Again in this case, 
with a transformer out of service, with the possible closure 
of the coupler, it changes over to a system with a single 
busbar powered only by the healthy transformer, and load 
management logic must be provided with disconnection of 
non-priority loads.
In the case of several transformers in parallel, we must 
consider the limits imposed by the Standard CEI 0-16 and 
deal with in CEI Guide 99-4 on simultaneous energization of 
the transformers installed.
To meet this requirement, the User may not install 
transformers with a total capacity of more than three times the 
power limits previously indicated for each voltage level, even 
with separate LV busbars. Where the installed power is higher 
than the specified limit, appropriate devices must be provided 
in the User's installation in order to avoid the simultaneous 
energization of those transformers that would result in the 
above limitations being exceeded. These devices must trip in 
the case of a power outage exceeding 5 s and re-energize the 
transformers according to the overall quantities not exceeding 
the limits determined above, with re-entry times at an interval 
of at least 1 s.
CEI Guide 99-4, Annex F, provides guidelines for evaluation 
of the peak value of the inrush current of transformers in oil 
and the minimum delay time necessary to prevent unwanted 
tripping of protection: 
Transformer 
power rating S r 
(kVA)
Primary rated current r (A) Ki Time constant 
Ti (s)
15 kV 20 kV
50 1.9 1.4 15 0.10 
100 3.8 2.9 14 0.15
160 6.2 4.6 12 0.20
250 9.6 7.2 12 0.22
400 15.4 11.5 12 0.25
630 24.2 18.2 11 0.30 
800 30.8 23.1 10 0.30
1000 38.5 28.9 10 0.35
1250 48.1 36.1 9 0.35
1600 61.6 46.2 9 0.40
2000 77.0 57.7 8 0.45
Field in which there is no 
tripping of the protection
Tr/Ti
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4  0.5 0.6 I’r /ioi  
46
7.2 Selection of transformers 
on the basis of losses and 
energy efficiency
The requirements of the EU MEPS (European Minimum 
Energy Performance Standards, i.e. the minimum European 
requirements for energy efficiency) establish the minimum 
compulsory efficiency level for all transformers placed on 
the European market. They were introduced in accordance 
with Directive 2009/125 /EC of the European Parliament and 
the Commission, also known as the EcoDesign Directive, 
which establishing a reference framework for the producing 
specifications for the eco-compatible design of energy-related 
products (ERP). As part of ERPs, transformers have been 
identified as one of the priority product groups because of their 
considerable potential in terms of energy savings. Total annual 
losses produced by the currently installed transformers within 
the 28 EU member states amount in fact to about 100 TWh, 
equivalent to 40 million tonnes (Mt) of CO 2 emissions.
To implement the Directive in the area of transformers, 
the European Commission adopted, as a legal reference 
framework, regulation no. 548/2014 that sets the minimum 
efficiency requirements applicable to transformers. The 
purpose of the regulation is to prevent inefficient products 
from being introduced to the European market. The regulation 
is binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all 28 
Member States of the EU. EU MEPS requirements apply to 
distribution transformers, of both the dry type and those 
immersed in a liquid, as well as power transformers with a 
minimum rated power of at least 1 kVA, used in networks for 
the transport and distribution of electricity or for industrial 
applications. As of 1 July 2015, transformers that do not 
comply with the regulation can no longer be marketed in 
Europe. It is the responsibility, above all of the manufacturer, 
to make sure that the transformers conform to the regulations. 
The manufacture or importation into the European market 
of non-compliant transformers has been illegal since 1 July 
2015. However, especially during the transition period, it may 
be advisable to refer to the regulation as regards the minimum 
level of efficiency required. 
The European Commission has also provided that from 1 
July 2021 all transformers must comply with the efficiency 
requirements specified the “Phase 2” level of the regulation, 
which are more stringent. The Commission also plans to 
undertake, at the latest in the 2017, an “interim” assessment 
of the regulation during which levels the the requirements 
established for “Phase 2” will be reviewed and may be 
changed.
7.3 Efficiency requirements 
and classes 
 for transformers
The maximum permitted levels of losses for transformers with 
maximum rated power not exceeding 3150 kVA are based on 
the classification of the S tandards CEI EN 50464-1:2007 and 
subsequent variant /A1:2012 and CEI EN 50541-1:2011.
It should be emphasized that the above EN standards are 
undergoing unification and revision in order to support the 
regulation more directly. Efficiency classes lower than those 
specified in the EU MEPS regulation will disappear completely.
For medium/low voltage transformers in oil, the Standard CEI 
EN 50464-1 provides 4 loss class due to the load and 5 no-
load loss classes.
The two following tables show the values prescribed for 
losses due to the load P k and the no-load losses P 0 for 
transformers with rated voltages up to 24 kV. 
7.  Power transformers
Power rating 
voltage Ck Bk Ak
Short-circuit 
impedance
KVA W W W %
50 1100 875 750
4 
100 1750 1475 1250
160 2350 2000 1700
250 3250 2750 2350
315 3900 3250 2800
400 4600 3850 3250
500 5500 4600 3900
630 6500 5400 4600
630 6750 5600 4800
6
800 8400 7000 6000
1000 10500 9000 7600
1250 13500 11000 9500
1600 17000 14000 12000
2000 21000 18000 15000
2500 26500 22000 18500
Losses due to the load (P k)
47
In the Standard CEI EN 50541-1 instead, we find a similar table
for dry-type transformers with rates voltages of 17.5 and 24 kV 
and short-circuit impedance of 6%:
Um Sr
Pk Pk Po                   LWA Po                   L WA Po                   L WA
Ak Bk Ao Bo Co
kV kVA W W W dB (A) W dB (A) W dB (A)
17.5 
and
24
100 1800 2050 280 51 340 51 460 59
160 2600 2900 400   54 480 54 650 62
250 3400 3800 520 57 650 57 880 65
400 4500 5500 750 60 940 60 1200 68
630 7100 7600 1100 62 1250 62 1650 70
800 8000 9400 1300 64 1500 64 2000 72
1000 9000 11000 1550 65 1800 65 2300 73
1250 11000 13000 1800 67 2100 67 2800 75
1600 13000 16000 2200 68 2400 68 3100 76
2000 16000 18000 2600 70 3000 70 4000 78
2500 19000 23000 3100 71 3600 71 5000 81
3150 22000 28000 3800 74 4300 74 6000 83
Power rating
voltage Do Co Bo Ao
Short-circuit
impedance
kVA 
Po LwA Po LwA Po LwA Po LwA
%
W dB(A) W dB(A) W dB(A) W dB(A) 
50 145 50 125 47 110 42 90 39
4
100 260 54 210 49 180 44 145 41
160 375 57 300 52 260 47 210 44
250 530 60 425 55 360 50 300 47
315 630 61 520 57 440 52 360 49
400 750 63 610 58 520 53 430 50
500 880 64 720 59 610 54 510 51
630 1 030 65 860 60 730 55 600 52
630 940 65 800 60 680 55 560 52
6
800 1150 66 930 61 800 56 650 53
1000 1400 68 1100 63 940 58 770 55
1250 1750 69 1350 64 1150 59 950 56 
1600 2200 71 1700 66 1450 61 1200 58
2000 2700 73 2100 68 1800 63 1450 60
2500 3200 76 2500 71 2150 66 1750 63
No-load losses (P o)
48
7.  Power transformers
Returning to the EU MEPS requirements, the classes indicated 
for distribution transformers immersed in liquid with Um<=24 
kV are as follows according to the specifications for the two 
phases:
Phase 1 Phase 2
25–1000 kVA Ck, A0 Ak,A0-10%
1001–3150 kVA Bk, A0 Ak, A0-10%
On the other hand, for dry type transformers, again with 
Um≤24 kV, we have:
Phase 1 Phase 2
25-630 kVA Bk, A0 Ak, A0-10%
631–3150 kVA Ak, A0 Ak, A0-10%
From 1 July 2015, the operating data plate for transformers 
that are within the scope of the regulation must necessarily 
include the following information on the product, in addition to 
those required under the standard EN 60076-1:
– Values and name of the load loss and no-load loss classes 
for transformers ≤  3150 kVA
– information on the weight of all the main components of a 
transformer (including at least the conductor, its type and 
the base material)
As can be deduced from the values shown in the tables of 
losses, values obviously resulting from different construction 
characteristics, the oil transformers have lower no-load losses 
than the dry type transformers and comparable load losses.
It follows that, in choosing the transformer, one must take 
into account the type of operation for which it is intended: 
if the prevalent use is with low loads or even no load, an 
oil transformer is preferable; otherwise, you can use a dry 
transformer with reduced losses. 
49
7.4 Selection criteria for 
transformers based on 
capitalization of the losses
Both CEI 99-4 and CEI EN 50464-1 deal with the choice of 
transformers based on capitalization of losses, an indication 
of how important this parameter is in the selection process.
This method, in fact, allows an economic valuation of the 
cost of the machines basing it on the losses and therefore 
considering real-world operation; the formula used is of the 
type: 
Cc=CT+A P0 +B PK 
Where:
Cc cost capitalized;
CT price at offer;
A monetary value by W  no-load losses;
P0 no-load losses guaranteed in W;
B monetary value by W of load losses;
PK losses due to the load in W.
In assessing the purchase of the transformer, it is worthwhile 
considering not only the initial cost but also the cost 
capitalized over a given number of years of operation, in order 
to take account of losses.
The result of the analysis may in fact show that it is more 
economical to purchase of a transformer with reduced losses 
even if it is more expensive than one with higher losses but 
cheaper.
7.5 Example of a transformer 
for a transformer 
substation
The location of the substation can be a deciding factor in the 
choice of the transformer; in electrical substations located 
in public buildings or with high presence of persons such 
as shopping centers, hospitals or sports facilities, it may 
be necessary to minimize the risk of fire and therefore to 
recommend the installation of dry type transformers in class 
F1 with minimum flammability and smoke emission.
An excellent solution for the the above-mentioned electrical 
substations might be the ABB hi-T Plus dry transformers 
encased in resin. These transformers are in class H (the 
highest with reference to IEC 60076-11) but instead of 
reaching the maximum temperature of the hottest point 
allowed by the standard of 180 °C, they are designed to reach 
a lower temperature, a maximum of 155 °C.
This leads to enormous advantages in terms of duration 
of insulation and/or possibility of overload (according to 
IEC 60076-12). In fact, thanks to these 25 K of difference 
in ABB hi-T Plus  transformers the expected average life 
of the insulation is more than ten times higher than that 
of a standard class F transformer working at the same 
temperature of the hottest point, and is almost double 
that of larger, more expensive class F transformers with an 
overtemperature limited to 80 K.
50
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
7.  Power transformers
Alternatively, these transformers can be permanently 
overloaded up to 115% of the rated load, without this having 
any negative impact on duration. During this overload the 
maximum temperature of the hot spot would reach 180 °C in 
accordance with the Standard IEC EN 60076-12.
Such superior insulation performance makes ABB hi-T Plus 
transformers the ideal solution for networks with a high level 
of harmonic distortion, load peaks, sudden overloads and 
high ambient temperatures.
The hi-T Plus transformers also combine extremely reduced 
loss values A 0Ak, and therefore lower losses according to the 
Standard CEI EN 50464-1 and in full accordance with the 
MEPS European Regulation, which allow the cost of losses to 
be reduced. 
To understand the benefits of a hi-T Plus transformer and 
a normal dry transformer, we apply the loss capitalization 
method already discussed and proposed by the Standard  
CEI 99-4.
We hypothesize that with a load of 1100 kVA, thanks to the 
overload capacity, it is possible to choose a 100 kVA hi-T Plus 
transformer instead of a normal 1250 kVA transformer:
– Hi-T Plus transformer with reduced losses with P 0 = 1550 W 
(A0) and P k = 9000 W (A k)
– Dry transformer with normal losses with P 0 = 2800 W (C 0) 
and P k = 13000 W (B k)
The following calculations can be made.
Assuming that the transformer has a load of 60% power 
for 16 hours a day for 230 working days and 10% in the 
remaining 8 hours, while during the 135 non-working days it 
is 10% for all 24 hours, with the reduced loss transformer we 
will have the following annual losses:
P0 = 365x24x1.55 = 13578 kWh;
Pk = 230x16x0.6x0.6x9.0 = 11923 kWh;
Pk = 230x8x0.1x0.1x9.0 = 165 kWh;
Pk = 135x24x0.1x0.1x9.0 = 292 kWh.
In total there will be about 25958 kWh of losses.Class F transformer
hi-T Plus transformer
Overload
1.20
1.15
1.10
1.05
1.00
0.95
0.90
% insulation 
duration
Class F at 100 K
Class F at 80 K
hi-T Plus
Expected duration of the insulation, assuming that F 100 K = 100%
51
On the other hand, with the dry transformer with normal 
losses annual losses will be as follows:
P0 = 365x24x2.80 = 24528 kWh;
Pk = 230x16x0.6x0.6x13.0 = 17222 kWh;
Pk = 230x8x0.1x0.1x13.0 = 239 kWh;
Pk = 135x24x0.1x01x13.0 = 421 kWh.
In total there will be about 42410 kWh of losses.
Then if we want to evaluate the cost of the losses over a 
period of use of 10 years, and assuming that the average cost 
of energy per time slot are:
A = 0.098 €/kWh and B = 0.13 €/kWh,
the following values are obtained:
Hi-T Plus transformed with reduced losses:
A x P 0 = 13578 x 0.098 x 10 = 13306 €
B x P k = 12380 x 0.13 x 10 = 16094 €
Total cost of losses equal to approximately 29400 €.
Dry transformer with normal losses:
A x P 0 = 24528 x 0.098 x 10 = 24037 €
B x P k = 17882 x 0.13 x 10 = 23247 €
Total cost of losses equal to approximately 47285 €.
The saving calculated is therefore 17884 € in 10 years.
The low-loss transformer has a higher purchase cost, but this 
saving the payback time would be very short, probably less 
than 2 years.
7.6 Level of noise in the 
transformers
In the choice of equipment and components one must 
take account of the noise transmitted into the environment 
inside and outside the substation. The Standard CEI 99-4 
recommends that the noise level should be compatible with 
the characteristics of the installation environment and with the 
applicable regulations.
In transformer substations the main source of noise is the 
transformers themselves. The limits of the sound power level 
(dB) emitted are set by the Standards CEI EN 50464-1:2007 
and CEI EN 50541-1:2011. The same tables used for the load 
and no-load losses also specify the sound power levels L WA 
expressed in dB.
7.7 Losses in the substation
To determine the necessary air flow and the section of the 
openings for ventilation, one must know the total amount of 
overall heat produced by losses in the substation.
As long as the heat produced is not equal to the heat 
dispersed outside through the ventilation system (thermal 
regime) the internal temperature will increase. The component 
that produces the greatest losses is the transformer; we can 
therefore use some simplified methods, adding an estimate 
of the losses of the other components to the losses of the 
transformer.
Standard CEI 99-4 suggests three:
– consider additional losses as equal to about 10% to 15% of 
the total losses of the transformer
– consider for the additional losses values per m 2 of the 
surface of the substation (typical values around 100 W/m 2 ÷ 
200 W/m 2)
– consider the losses of the components provided by the 
manufacturers and estimate a value for the cable losses.
52
8. LV Switchgear and Systems
8.1 Connection of the 
transformer and the LV 
switchgear
Normally the connection between the MV/LV transformer and 
the LV switchgear in the substation is made in the busbar duct. 
The busbar duct is a viable alternative to a cable connection 
as it is very compact at high currents compared to the cable 
solution and connects naturally both to the LV terminals of 
the (see the figure) on one side, and to the busbars of the LV 
switchgear on the other end. In addition, busbar ducts have the 
advantage of having electrical and mechanical characteristics 
that are already defined and factory tested by the manufacturer 
and of reducing the risk of fire compared to the use of cables. 
Not least, busbar ducts are cheaper than cables for high 
currents.
8.2 LV switchgear
Low voltage switchgear, installed downstream of the MV/LV 
power transformers, are equipped with the main incoming 
circuit-breaker (open or moulded case) and with a number 
of circuit-breakers for startups with electrical characteristics 
(rated voltage, rated current, breaking capacity), in a number 
and configuration that depend on the electrical installation to 
be powered. 
Therefore we will not go into the details of this key component 
of the substation.
The reference standard for LV switchgear is CEI 61439-1, 
which is the base standard, followed by all the sub-standards 
of the 61439 family (6 in total):
1)  CEI 61439-1: “Assembled protection and switching 
equipment for low voltage (LV switchgear ) Part 1: “General 
rules”
2)  CEI EN 61439-2: “Power switchgear”
3)  CEI EN 61439-3: “Distribution switchgear”
4)  CEI EN 61439-4: “Switchgear for building sites”
5)  CEI EN 61439-5: “Switchgear for power distribution”
6)  CEI EN 61439-6: “Busbar duct systems” 
The base standard establishes the requirements for the 
construction, safety and maintenance of electrical switchgear 
by identifying the rated characteristics, environmental 
conditions of service, mechanical and electrical requirements 
and requirements regarding performance 
In addition, for protections against direct contact and indirect 
contact, the requirements of Standard CEI 64-8 apply.
The busway can be easily 
connected to the busbar system 
of the circuit-breakers in the 
switchgear.
53
61439-2
61439-3
61439-4
61439-1
61439-661439-5
The following figure shows examples of Power Centers 
implemented with ABB switchgear of the ArTù K type and 
ABB circuit-breakers (System Pro M modular circuit-breakers, 
Tmax moulded case circuit-breakers T series T and XT series, 
and Emax air circuit-breakers) with an optimal and certified 
level of integration. Key elements to consider in the design of 
the substation are the dimensions of the switchgear for sizing 
the User room and dissipation for the calculation of natural or 
forced ventilation.
For distribution
of power
of Power CPS
Final distribution
Building site 
switchgear
Busbar systems
54
9. Prefabricated substations
The reference standard for these products is the Standard 
CEI EN 62271-202. Prefabricated substations contain all 
the electrical equipment necessary for the operation of the 
substation: the transformer, the MV and LV switchgear, the 
connections and all the auxiliaries. Since these substations 
are often located in areas accessible to the public, the 
law prescribes specific tests to ensure the protection of 
persons against an internal arc. In particular, three classes 
are specified for the internal arc according to accessibility: 
class IAC-A for substations that guarantee protection to 
operating personnel inside or outside the substation; class 
IAC-B for substations that guarantee protection to the 
public on all sides; lastly, class IAC-AB for substations that 
guarantee protection to both, operators and the public. In 
versions accessible inside, in combination with the UniSec 
switchgear for secondary distribution, ABB CSS (Compact 
Secondary Substations) prefabricated substations can 
guarantee class IAC-AB up to 20 kA for 1 s and therefore, 
in addition to internal safety for authorised operators, also 
external safety for operators and the public, according to both 
CEI EN 62271-202 and to CEI EN 62271-200 regarding the 
switchgear.  
Regarding the operating conditions, the standard requires 
the class of the structure to be defined based on the rated 
maximum power of the prefabricated substation. There is, in 
fact, an increase in the temperature of the transformer, greater 
than the overtemperature in free air, which depends on the 
characteristics of the structure as well as on the conditions of 
service. The class then defines the overtemperature ∆ t that 
occurs on the transformer during operation in the substation 
in K:
Class 5: ∆ t ≤ 5 K, Class 10: ∆ t ≤ 10 K, Class 15: ∆ t ≤ 15 K, 
Class 20: ∆ t ≤ 20 K, Class 25: ∆ t ≤ 25 K, Class 30: ∆ t ≤ 30 K.
Take, for example, the hi-T Plus transformer in insulation 
class H and therefore with a maximum temperature that can 
be reached equal to 180 °C. The Standard CEI EN 62271-
202 provides the following chart to determine the load factor 
of the transformer as a function of the nominal class of the 
substation and of the average ambient temperature in a given 
period of time. We will assume the following environmental 
conditions:
Average ambient temperature during the year of 10 °C, in 
particular the average ambient temperature during the winter 
is 0 °C and the average ambient temperature during the 
summer is 20 °C. 
55
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
-50
-60
-70
-80
The transportation of the substation does not require the use 
of exceptional transport, and should it be necessary to move 
the substation to another location the operation is simple 
and takes a short time. The substations have a base with the 
same characteristics as the casing footprint of which has the 
same dimensions as the substation. 
The substations are available in three different materials: steel, 
concrete and GRP (Glass-Fiber Reinforced Polyester), the 
latter with interesting characteristics of lightness, strength 
and thermal capacity, and transparency to electromagnetic 
waves, useful where communication systems are used for the 
management of the networks (e.g. smart grids).
Therefore the main advantages offered by prefabricated 
substations are:
– easy to transport
– immediate on-site installation after laying the base
– product build in full compliance with CEI EN 62271-202
– product tested in the factory with all the various 
components and therefore immediately usable. 
Consider a 630 kVA transformer with average load during the 
year of 600 kVA.
Using figure DD.7 of the Standard, for a temperature of 10 °C 
and with a load factor of 0.95, we find that we must ask the 
manufacturer for class 25. 
Considering the worst situation, however, namely the summer 
average temperature of 20 °C and with the same load factor, 
you will need to request class 15. 
The metal reinforcement with which the substation is 
equipped implements a homogeneous equipotential 
earthing mesh throughout the structure, which subsequently 
connected to the earthing system protects the internal 
equipment against atmospheric overvoltages and limits the 
effects of step and contact voltages to negligible values. 
The whole structure is entirely assembled and tested with 
electrical equipment in the factory and is ready to be located 
at the site for subsequent commissioning. Installation 
activities are therefore limited to the cable connections 
between the various substations and distribution switchgear. 
Ambient temperature
Figure DD.7 – Insulation class 180 °C (H) dry-type transformers load factor in an enclosure
No enclosure Class 20Class 5 Class 15Class 10 Class 25 Class 30
1.2  1.1  1  0.9   0.8
56
10. Other requirements of the substation 
electrical system
It is important not to overlook the design of the electrical 
system of the substation, certain requirements mentioned 
in the standard CEI EN 61936-1 concerning overvoltages, 
harmonics and electric and magnetic fields, very important for 
the impact that they can have on the health of persons and 
the life of the electrical equipment.
10.1 Overvoltages 
As regards the overvoltages, the standard requires that 
the switchgear be protected against overvoltages caused 
by opening or closing operations and by atmospheric 
discharges. The standard also requires an analysis to be 
carried out to check for the presence of such overvoltages 
during operation so as not to exceed the withstand values of 
the switchgear. If such limits are exceeded the designer must 
provide suitable protections.
It is emphasized that the choice of such protection devices 
depends on the neutral earthing system and the sizing of the 
earthing system.
CEI 0-16 merely indicates that any impulse overvoltages may 
damage both control and power electronic components as 
well as motors, cables and electrical equipment in general, 
damaging the circuits and perforating insulation.
Network models are often very complicated and require 
technicians who are expert in simulations, but they obtain the 
result of highlighting the most hazardous transient phenomena 
for the installation.
On the basis of its experience as a manufacturer of electrical 
equipment, ABB is able to support those who are designing 
complex systems with appropriate studies aimed at:
– calculation of transient overcurrents caused by the insertion 
of capacitor banks.
– calculation of transient overcurrents caused by the insertion 
of filtering banks
– calculation of insertion transients of power transformers
– calculations of ferroresonance
– calculation and analysis of Transient Recovery Voltage
– calculation of switching overvoltages and their suppression
– calculation of starting currents of critical motors
– analysis of the network in order to analyze in general the 
abnormal conditions which may occur in the installation, 
identifying the critical points to be checked
10.2 Harmonics and electrical 
and magnetic fields
Harmonics
The maximum disturbances, including harmonics, which 
can be introduced into the network are indicated by the 
Distributor, taking into account the margins available in the 
network zone involved. The same user appliances may be 
sensitive to harmonics; the Standard CEI 0-16 provides a list 
of them with the possible related consequences.
Harmonics
Capacitors Overheating and condensation 
damage
Protection relays Accidental tripping of 
protection relays
Low power level 
connections 
Malfunction of control systems 
and data transmission
Motors and rotating 
machines Increase in losses of motors, 
transformers and cables and 
consequent overheatingTransformers
Electrical Cables
57
procedures for measuring and assessing magnetic induction”.
Finally, as regards the methods for mitigation of the magnetic 
fields generated by MV/LV substations, the Standard CEI 99-4 
refers to the information in CEI Guide 106-12 “Practical Guide 
to the methods and criteria for the reduction of the magnetic 
fields produced by MV/LV substations”.
Based on the provisions of the above-mentioned legislative 
framework, in designing new substations located in the 
vicinity of play areas for children, residential areas, school 
environments and places where persons spend more than four 
hours per day, account must be taken as regards magnetic 
induction of the quality objective of 3 µT defined in the Decree 
of the President of the Council of Ministers of 8 July 2003.
Within the restricted areas around substations, defined as the 
surrounding space that includes all the points characterized 
by magnetic induction of an intensity greater than or equal to 
the quality objective, there must be no allocated use involving 
presence greater than 4 hours.
Note that the owner or operator, together with the design 
data must also provide the competent authority, as part of 
the authorization procedure, with the first approximation 
distances, defined as the distance from all sides of the the 
substation box that guarantees that every point, the projection 
of which to the ground is further than the DPA from the 
projection of the center, is outside the restricted zones. For 
DPAs of transformer substations (MV/LV) you can refer to 
Ministerial Decree 29/05/2008, paragraph 5.2.1. 
In industrial plants, some appliances contribute to the 
generation of harmonics and must, therefore, be checked; 
these are:
– Industrial furnaces (induction, HF, UHF, arc)
– Motors (asynchronous, variable speed)
– Converters (AC/DC, AC/AC and cyclo-converters)
– Equipment for electrical discharge machining
– Discharge lamps
– Televisions
– Equipment for radiology  
A mention should be made regarding the power factor 
correction capacitors (low and medium voltage); they are to 
be installed in such a way as to present no danger of initiation 
or propagation of fire to adjacent material, and in such a 
way as not to amplify the harmonic currents present in the 
plant and thus without worsening the level of low frequency 
electromagnetic pollution (see IEC/TR 61000-3-6).
Electromagnetic fields
Annex I of CEI 99-4 deals with the problem of possible 
measures to reduce the electromagnetic field (EMF) that can 
be associated with MV/LV substations.
From the legislative point of view, for exposure to electric, 
magnetic and electromagnetic fields at industrial frequency, 
the reference is the Law no.36 of 22 February 2001 
“Framework law on protection against exposure to electric, 
magnetic and electromagnetic fields” and the Decree of 
the President of the Council of Ministers of 8 July 2003 
“Establishment of exposure limits, attention values and quality 
objectives for the protection of the population from exposure 
to electric and magnetic fields at mains frequency (50 Hz) 
generated by power lines”. 
In addition, regarding the positioning of the substation at the 
user site with consideration to the surrounding environment, 
consideration must be given to the requirements of the 
Ministerial Decree of 29 May 2008 “Approval of the calculation 
methodology for determining the distance restrictions for 
power lines”, in relation to the first approximation distance 
(DPA) regarding exposure to electromagnetic fields and 
the Ministerial Decree of 29 May 2008 on “Approval of the 
58
By way of example, the following table shows the DPAs for    
3 µT zones calculated in some real-world cases.
10. Other requirements of the substation 
electrical system
Dpa = First approximation distance (m); 
I  = rated current (A); 
x  =  diameter of the cables (m)
To determine the DPA the owner/operator of the substation 
must:
1. Use the curve illustrated in the chart below to calculate 
the value of DPA/root of the current for the type of output 
cables from the MV/LV transformer
2. Multiply this value by the root of the current round up to 
the next half meter
Dpa  
I
Equation of the curve: = 0.40942 * x  0.5241  
Diameter 
of the cables (m) 
Type of 
transformer (kVA)
Current 
(A)
Dpa
(m)
0.010
250 361 1
400 578 1
630 909 1.5
0.012
250 361 1
400 578 1.5
630 909 1.5
0.014
250 361 1
400 578 1.5
630 909 1.5
0.018
250 361 1.5
400 578 1.5
630 909 2
0.022
250 361 1.5
400 578 1.5
630 909 2
0.027
250 361 1.5
400 578 2
630 909 2.5
0.035
250 361 1.5
400 578 2
630 909 2.5
diameter of the cables (mm)
Dpa/rad (I)
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 As an indication, therefore, for standard secondary 
substations the DPA varies from 1.0 m to 2.5 m.
59
11. Request for connection
Before completing the connection, the User must provide 
a declaration for the substation (both those included in 
buildings and those constituting a building in their own right) 
stating that the performance of the structures comply with the 
requirements and accompanied by:
– an original copy of the certificate of viability and building 
registration 
– an original copy of all licenses and various permits 
– the test certificate for reinforced concrete works (Law 1086)
– certificates of conformity for the technological systems of 
the building 
– final drawings “as built” both building electromechanical 
– final drawings for HV and MV overhead and cable lines
– copy of deeds and easements 
– use and maintenance manuals including the construction 
drawings of the equipment 
– project report 
– check and test sheets countersigned by the technician 
carrying out the work and the manufacturer certifying 
conformity of the rooms to the Standard CEI 99-2 (in the 
case of a substation built on site or inside civil buildings) or 
the compliance of the rooms and their plant with the same 
standard CEI 17-103 (in the case of a low substation in a 
prefabricated box)
– protection calibration tables 
– pre-stressing tables 
– earthing system report 
Finally, with regard to the surrounding environment, the 
positioning of the structures must meet the requirements 
of the Ministerial Decree of 29 May 2008 “Approval of the 
calculation methodology for determining the restricted zones 
for power lines”, in relation to the first approximation distance 
(DPA) regarding exposure to electromagnetic fields.
One the check on all the documentation listed above has 
been completed favourably, the Distributor will draw up the 
“Report on testing and final acceptance of network works for 
connection”.
60
12. Inspections and tests in situ prior to 
putting into service
Prior to commissioning, inspections and tests must be carried 
out to verify the compliance of the installation of the electrical 
components with the applicable technical specifications that 
must be subject to agreement between supplier and user.
The Standard CEI 99-4 includes in turn the provisions of 
standard CEI EN 61936-1.
This verification can be performed in the following ways:
– visual inspection
– functional tests
– measurements.
In fact, the inspections and tests on parts of the electrical 
installations can be performed after delivery and even after 
completion of the installation.
Typically the following checks are performed:
– verification of the characteristics of the electrical 
components for the intended operating conditions;
– verification of the minimum isolation distances between live 
parts, and between live parts and earth
– test on voltages for cables
– verification of the minimum heights and distances between 
the barriers
– visual inspections and/or functional tests on electrical 
components and parts of the installation
– functional tests and/or measurements on protection, 
monitoring, measurement and command devices
– inspection of rating plates, safety signs and safety devices
– check on the earthing system as specified by the Standard 
CEI EN 61936-1.
61
13. Maintenance of the electrical 
substation
In Italian Legislative Decree 81/08 “Electrical installations 
and equipment” Article 80 “Obligations of the employer” it 
states that the employer must, among other things, develop 
procedures for use and maintenance that can guarantee that 
the safety level reached with the adoption of the measures 
taken will be maintained over time. Poor maintenance, in 
fact, over time generates those risk conditions that technical 
standards and the manufacturers seek to limit by introducing 
rules and innovations at the design and construction stages.
There is a specific standard, CEI 78-17 2015: Maintenance 
of MV/MV and MV/LV electrical substations of customers/
end users (revision of the previous edition CEI 0-15 2006) the 
purpose of which is to propose a maintenance method based 
on the identification of all the components of the substation 
that are to be maintained. 
In addition, with the Resolution of 29 December 2011, ARG/
elt 198/11, in point 39.2 of Annex A -, the AEEG (Authority 
for Electricity, Gas and the Water System) requires MV Users, 
with power available for withdrawal less than or equal to 
400 kW, who meet the simplified requirements, to carry out 
maintenance pursuant to Standard CEI 0-15 (now CEI 78-17) 
recording it in a special register, as a condition for access 
to compensation if the specific level of service continuity as 
specified by the Distributor is not respected.
The standard provides the technical instructions for carrying 
out the necessary maintenance work safely for the proper 
operation of electrical substations and associated connected 
systems with reference also to the Standard CEI 0-16.
Therefore it refers to:
– all the MV and LV electrical components of the reception 
substation and of any MV/MV distribution substations of the 
end user (e.g. circuit-breakers, disconnectors, switchgear, 
transformers, converters, batteries, capacitors, earthing 
systems, etc.. )
– all the components powered by the MV network of the end 
customer (e.g. circuit-breakers, switchgear, motors, etc.).
– all the MV cables
– all safety systems dedicated to the protection of the 
persons operating on the systems and/or in their vicinity (in 
accordance with the Standards CEI 11-27 and CEI 11-
15) and of the actual electrical installations (e.g. buildings, 
fences, safety exits, fire extinguishers and sprinkler 
systems, equipment for emergency lighting, signs, locks, 
interlocks, protection relays, etc.).
The provisions also cover the components used for the 
generation of both MV and LV, even if located in different 
rooms, which are not, however, the subject of this publication.
Remember that maintenance may be corrective or preventive:
– corrective maintenance involves the renovation or 
replacement of components affected by a fault so as to 
return the system to operating conditions
– preventive maintenance, on the other hand, is designed 
to limit degradation of the components due their use. A 
particular case of preventive maintenance is predictive 
maintenance, which consists in checking the state of 
preservation of the components and, therefore, to anticipate 
their decay using methods to determine the residual lifetime 
of the components, reporting the need for maintenance or 
replacement, also with new generation components.
In the latter case, ABB offers the MyRemoteCare and 
MySiteCare products.
MyRemoteCare provides the ability to store diagnostic 
information on the individual devices and use this to generate 
reports and alarm signals. In addition, the analysis of historical 
data and trends makes it possible to determine deviations of 
the components from standard behavior over time. In this way 
the ABB service technicians can analyze the diagnostic data 
of the circuit-breakers remotely, but also low, medium and 
high voltage devices and transformers, signalling any possible 
problems, verifying the causes and undertaking where 
appropriate the necessary short or long-term maintenance. 
The maintenance managers can check the activities 
planned and carried out by ABB experts by consulting the 
MyRemoteCare portal.
The system collects diagnostic information mainly through 
MySiteCare or a universal diagnostic device for circuit-
breakers. 
The MySiteCare monitoring and diagnostic device acquires 
the typical data of the circuit-breakers and transforms 
them into diagnostic data so as to determine the operating 
conditions and allow maintenance to be scheduled. The 
device can gather the following information:
– mechanical data: opening and closing times, loading time of 
the springs of the operating mechanism, failed attempts to 
load the spring, number of operations, downtime;
– environmental data, such as the temperatures in the 
compartments of the functional unit:
– real diagnostic data such as the estimated residual life and 
wear of the contacts.
On the basis of these data the device runs predictive 
diagnostic algorithms, providing information on the 
mechanical, electrical and functional conditions of the circuit-
breaker.
62
No change is required to the switchgear, the circuit-breaker or 
the protection relay. The components to be installed are the 
central unit, the current sensor and the wireless identification 
device (RDIF) that stores the data of the circuit-breaker in a 
unique manner and transmits them to the central unit. The 
predictive algorithms are configured by ABB technicians 
during installation. 
The information processed by each MySiteCare is transmitted 
through a concentrator and telephone network to the ABB 
Data Centre.
In the absence of significant events that are reported 
immediately, the status of the system is updated every 24 
hours. The ABB specialized technicians can access the portal 
via the Internet to consult the diagnostic data and provide the 
necessary support.
Finally, as a further solution to the problem of maintenance, 
we also consider the upgrading and retrofitting equipment in 
order to adapt it to the state of the art in terms of technology 
and safety.
After an appropriate analysis of the state of the equipment, 
complete replacement may in fact turn out to be more 
convenient than the usual ordinary maintenance. For 
example, it is possible to upgrade old circuit-breakers that 
have become obsolete in terms of technology, such as air or 
reduced oil circuit-breakers with modern switches in SF 6 or 
vacuum circuit-breakers where all the solutions for increasing 
safety of personnel are implemented.  
13. Maintenance of the electrical 
substation
63
The solution proposed by ABB in this case is called 
OneFit: the new circuit-breaker is adapted mechanically 
and electrically by means of a check carried out on site 
on the existing switchgear by qualified and experienced 
personnel. The result is an improvement not only in the typical 
performance of a new device, but also and above all in safety.  
No change is required to the switchgear, the circuit-breaker or 
the protection relay. The components to be installed are the 
central unit, the current sensor and the wireless identification 
device (RDIF) that stores the data of the circuit-breaker in a 
unique manner and transmits them to the central unit. The 
predictive algorithms are configured by ABB technicians 
during installation. 
The information processed by each MySiteCare is transmitted 
through a concentrator and telephone network to the ABB 
Data Centre.
In the absence of significant events that are reported 
immediately, the status of the system is updated every 24 
hours. The ABB specialized technicians can access the portal 
via the Internet to consult the diagnostic data and provide the 
necessary support.
Finally, as a further solution to the problem of maintenance, 
we also consider the upgrading and retrofitting equipment in 
order to adapt it to the state of the art in terms of technology 
and safety.
After an appropriate analysis of the state of the equipment, 
complete replacement may in fact turn out to be more 
convenient than the usual ordinary maintenance. For 
example, it is possible to upgrade old circuit-breakers that 
have become obsolete in terms of technology, such as air or 
reduced oil circuit-breakers with modern switches in SF 6 or 
vacuum circuit-breakers where all the solutions for increasing 
safety of personnel are implemented. 
The solution proposed by ABB in this case is called 
OneFit: the new circuit-breaker is adapted mechanically 
and electrically by means of a check carried out on site 
on the existing switchgear by qualified and experienced 
personnel. The result is an improvement not only in the typical 
performance of a new device, but also and above all in safety, 
through solutions such as interlocks between the circuit-
breaker and the door, remote control, insertion/extraction with 
the door closed and everything else that is made possible by 
modern technology in terms of protection and monitoring.
Addressing the issue of contracting and carrying out 
maintenance work, remember that the Employer/principal 
of the company who owns the substation and facilities, if 
such activity is outsourced in part or in whole to an outside 
company, has full responsibility both for the choice of the 
contracting company for checking the suitability of their 
personnel as required by Article 26 of Legislative Decree 
81/08 and subsequent amendments.
All work must be carried out in compliance with the applicable 
laws and technical standards.
The documentation relating to specific maintenance 
operations may consist of a “maintenance log”, which 
can also be computerized and which must in any case be 
available at the installation, that contains the wiring diagrams 
and technical specifications.
The maintenance sheets, the preparation of which is the 
responsibility of the owner of the electrical installation, are 
based on the technical and maintenance manuals of the 
manufacturers of components and services, and must contain 
at least the following:
– identification of the substation
– code or progressive number of the sheet
– name of the circuit and/or element in question
– summary description of the checks or service operations
– maximum time interval between actions
– particular work carried out and, if not carried out, the reason
– date carried out and initials of the maintenance worker 
– outcome of the maintenance work
– signatures of maintenance staff and any notes
Annex B of Standard CEI 78-17 provides examples of 
maintenance sheets complete with all the necessary 
information in order to provide a method for preparing and 
completing them. The sheets must obviously be adapted to 
the actual system. An example of a sheet is shown below that 
is included in the standard to which you are referred for the 
necessary complete information.
64
13. Maintenance of the electrical 
substation
– Identifier MV/MV or MV/LV SUBSTATION xx xxx - QMT-A/CFE1-MV - SHEET NO. 1 - 
Circuit-breaker in SF 6 for General Protection of the installation (PG)
NOTE: Consult the manufacturers' 
specifications, if they exist or 
are available - Interventions are 
carried out following a visual and/or 
instrumental inspection
Max 
Period
Result
Initials
Date
Result
Initials
Date
Result
Initials
Date
Result
Initials
Date
Result
Initials
Date Notes
1 PGISF6 - General and installation check 1 year
2 PGISF 6 - Check on integrity of insulating 
parts and cleaning
1 year
3 PGISF 6 - Check and clean of the main 
coupling and connection contacts
1 year
4 PGISF 6 - Check electrical operation 1 year
5 PGISF 6 - Check auxiliary voltages 1 year
6 PGISF 6 - Control gas pressure in the poles 
and refill if necessary 
1 year
7 PGISF 6 - Run O-CO operating cycle 1 year
8 PGISF 6 - Check insertion - test - extracted 1 year
9 PGISF 6 - Replace components of the 
mechanical control that are subject to 
wear
5 years
10 PGISF 6 - Adjustment of the mechanism 
control 
5 years
11 PGISF 6 - Measure opening and closing 
times and compare with rated data
2 years
12 PGISF 6 - Check wear on arc contacts, if 
possible
5 years
13 PGISF 6 – Check features relay of 
protection supplemented by test 
switchgear
2 years
14 PGISF 6 - Clean and lubricate operating 
mechanisms
2 years
15 PGISF 6 - Replacement of the mechanical 
operating mechanism only on reaching
the operation limit specified by the 
manufacturer
16 PGISF 6 - Replacement of the poles 
only on reaching of the limit of 
current interruptions specified by the 
manufacturer
17 –
Overall outcome of periodic servicing
In the “Outcome” columns write “P” if the maintenance job is positive - or - “Pl” if the check is positive following a 
maintenance job - or -“NA” when the maintenance job is postponed to subsequent sessions - or - “NP” if the component 
is not present - or -“VN” acronym for SEE NOTE ("VEDERE NOTA" in Italian) (to be inserted in the NOTES column to the 
side) - or -“B” if the maintenance work will be carried out by the manufacturer/service centre - or - “C” if the necessary 
partial or total replacements will be carried out by the manufacturer/service centre according to the indications to be 
entered in the NOTES column at the side. In the  “Initials” column enter the initials that identify the maintenance worker 
and in the“Date” column write the date on which the maintenance was carried out.
Signatures of Maintenance 
Staff
1
2
3
4
5
65
14. Example of substation design - 
electrical part
14.1 Estimate of the power 
supplied to a small 
industrial factory
We will take a small industrial plant as an example. Production 
involves a stabilized thermal cycle in the furnace for which 
reason a total black-out is not possible. The plant is also 
located in a densely populated area.
The starting point for the design is the estimation of the 
consumption of the various users.
If in assessing the required power you were to consider the 
sum of the rated power of all equipment and users you would 
Alternatively you can use table 101 of the Standard CEI EN 61439-2:
get a value that is certainly excessive, for two reasons:
– some equipment might not be used at its full power
– the equipment will not all be work at the same time
This is taken into account with two coefficients: the 
utilization factor Ku and the contemporaneity factor Kc. 
The ideal would be to have the actual data, as in the 
case of renovation of an existing installation for which the 
load diagrams are available; however, in the case of new 
projects, the load diagram is not available, and therefore 
one has to estimate the actual load by using factors derived 
statistically on homogeneous categories of installations as 
proposed by CEI Guide 99-4, Annex E, attached here.
Type of
system
Contemporaneity factors
Type of environment
Individual housing 
units
Civil buildings for 
housing
Offices, shops, 
warehouses, 
departments
Hotels, hospitals Medium and high 
power industrial plants
Lighting 66% of the installed 
power
75% of the installed 
power
90% of the installed 
power
75% of the installed 
power
90% of the installed 
power
Heating 
(see also 3 or 6)
100% of the power 
of the equipment up 
to 10A + 50% of the 
remainder 
100% of the biggest 
user + 50% of the 
remainder
100% of the biggest 
user + 75% of the 
remainder
100% of the biggest 
user 
+ 80% of the second 
+ 60% of the remainder
100% of the biggest 
user + 75% of the 
remainder
Kitchens 100% of the power 
of the equipment up 
to 10A + 30% of the 
equipment over 10A 
permanently connected
100% of the biggest 
user + 80% of the 
second + 60% of the 
remainder
– 100% of the biggest 
user + 80% of the 
second + 60% of the 
remainder
–
Motors 
(with the exclusion 
of lifts, elevators, 
cranes, etc.).
– – 100% of the biggest 
motor + 80% of the 
second motor + 60% of 
the remainder
100% of the biggest 
motor + 80% of the 
second motor + 60% of 
the remainder
To be considered on a 
case 
by case basis
Water heaters No contemporaneity is allowed
Socket outlets 100% of the biggest 
user + 25% of the 
remainder
100% of the biggest 
user + 25% of the 
remainder
100% of the biggest 
user + 40% of the 
remainder
100% of the biggest 
user + 75% of the 
rooms + 25% of the 
remainder
25% of the user installed
Table 101 - Values of assumed loading
Type of load Assumed loading factor
Distribution - 2 and 3 circuits 0.9
Distribution - 4 and 5 circuits 0.8
Distribution - 6 and 9 circuits 0.7
Distribution - 10 or more circuits 0.5
Electric actuator 0.2
Motors ≤ 100 KW 0.8
Motors > 100 KW 1.0
66
In the example provided, the power used on the main LV 
switchgear is 732 kVA.
Considering the values of the rated power of the transformers 
available commercially, it can be assumed that two 
transformers 400 kVA transformers will be installed, which 
although resulting in a more expensive solution than that with 
only one 800 kVA transformer, can nevertheless be justified 
by the need to have a greater continuity of service in case of 
failures or maintenance.
In this situation the two transformers are loaded at 92% 
(732/800=0.92) of their rated power, and in the case of an 
outage of one of the two, it will still be possible to provide 
55% of the required power.
The other features of the substation are:
– the substation is powered by a buried cable 
– The transformers are closed in parallel on the secondary so 
as to guarantee the power supply of the LV installation by 
both of them
– The size of the internal MV network is less than 400 m
User S rated KVA
Ku
S used KVA 
Kc
S used KVA S used KVA S used KVA
Department A
motors (3) 150 0.8 120 0.8 96
134
732
various socket 
outlets 80 1 80 0.25 20
lighting 20 1 20 0.9 18
Department B
compressors (2) 130 0.8 104 0.8 83.2
140.45various socket 
outlets 85 1 85 0.25 21.25
lighting 40 1 40 0.9 36
Department C
motors (2) 50 0.8 40 0.8 32
131.25
furnaces (1) 70 1 70 1 70
various socket 
outlets 45 1 45 0.25 11.25
lighting 20 1 20 0.9 18
Department D
various socket 
outlets 155 1 155 0.25 38.75
92.75
lighting 60 1 60 0.9 54
Department E
motors (3) 125 0.8 100 0.8 80
141various socket 
outlets 100 1 100 0.25 25
lighting 40 1 40 0.9 36
Department F
various socket 
outlets 155 1 155 0.25 38.75
92.75
lighting 60 1 60 0.9 54
Sub-switchgear
Department switchgear
Main LV switchgear
14. Example of substation design - 
electrical part
67
 RQt  XQt Q
Q T A
LVHV
F
k3
L
 XTK
 Un
 tr:1
 A  XL  XL  F
 3
 cUn
14.2 Calculation of short circuit and coordination of protections
Theory behind calculation of the short-circuit current
To deal with the theory of calculation of short-circuit currents we will refer to the Standard IEC 60909-0 “Short-circuit 
currents in three-phase a.c. systems – Part 0: Calculation of currents”. With reference to the electrical network schematised 
in figure 1, a short-circuit is assumed on the load terminals. The network can be studied and represented by using the 
resistance and reactance parameters of each electrical component.
The resistance and reactance values of must be all related to the same voltage value assumed as a reference for calculating 
the short-circuit current. 
The change from impedance values Z 1 referring to a higher voltage (U 1) to the values Z 2, referring to a lower voltage (U 2), 
takes place using the transformation ratio K = U 1/U2 according to the following relationship:
Z2 = Z1/K2
The structure of the electrical network in question can be represented through elements in series; in this way an equivalent 
circuit is obtained like that shown in the following figure which makes it possible to calculate the equivalent impedance 
seen from the fault point.
 RQt  XQt Q
Non-rotating load
Non-rotating load
 XTK  A  XL  XL  F
 3
 cUn
68
An equivalent voltage source (U eq) is positioned at the point of 
the short circuit with the value:
Ueq = c U n /   3
The factor “c” depends on the system voltage and takes 
into account the influence of the loads and of the variation in 
mains voltage. The following is the table taken from Standard 
IEC 60909-0.
Transformer
The impedance of the machine can be calculated using the 
rated parameters of the machine itself (rated voltage U rT; 
apparent power S rT; short circuit voltage at the rated current 
in percent ukr) using the following formula:
ZT = (ukr / 100%) (U 2rT / SrT)
The resistive component can be determined by knowing the 
value of the total losses
PkrT referring to the rated current according to the following 
relationship:
RT = PkrT / (3 I 2rT)
The reactive component can be determined with the classic 
relationship
XT =   (Z T
2
 – RT
2)
Cables 
The impedance value of these connection elements depends 
on various factors (technical, constructive, temperature, 
etc.) that condition the linear resistance R’ L and the linear 
reactance X’ L. These two parameters expressed per unit 
of length are provided by the manufacturer of the cable; 
alternatively, reference values can be found in IEC 60909-2. 
In general, the resistance values are based on a reference 
temperature of 20 °C; for different operating temperatures θ 
the following formula makes it possible to relate the resistance 
value to the operating temperature.
R’Lθ= [1 + α (θ– 20)] R’L20
where:
α is the temperature coefficient that depends on the type of 
material (for copper, aluminum and aluminum alloys 
4x10-3 holds true with good approximation).
Therefore, in very simple terms we have:
RL= L R’L  and  XL= L X’L
with L the length of the cable line.
Voltage factor c for the calculation of
Nominal voltage
Un
maximum 
short- circuit currents
C max
1)
minimum 
short-circuit currents
Cmin
Low voltage 
100 V to 1000V
(IEC 60038, table I)
1.05 3)
1.10 4) 0.95
Medium voltage
> 1kV to 35 kV
(IEC 60038, table III)
1.10 AM 1.00
High voltage  2) 
> 35 kV
(IEC 60038, table IV)
1)  Cmax Un should not exceed the highest voltage U m for equipment of power systems.
2)   If no nominal voltage is defined C max Un = Um or Cmin Un = 0.90 x U m should be ap-
plied
3)  For low-voltage systems with a tolerance of + 6%, for example systems renamed 
from 380 V to 400 V
4)  For low-voltage systems with a tolerance of + 10%.  
Power supply network 
In most cases, the installation will be supplied by a medium 
voltage distribution network, for which it is quite easy to 
obtain the value of the supply voltage U nQ and the initial short-
circuit current I” kQ.
On the basis of these data and of a correction coefficient for 
the change in voltage caused by the short-circuit it is possible 
to determine the short-circuit direct impedance of the network 
with the following formula:
ZQ = c U nQ /(   3 I” kQ)
For the calculation of the network resistance and reactance 
parameters, if a precise value for value for R Q is not available, 
the following approximate formulas can be used: 
 
XQ = 0.995 Z Q
RQ = 0.1 X Q
14. Example of substation design - 
electrical part
69
L3
I”K3
L2
L1
L3
I”K3
L2
L1
Calculation of the short-circuit current
The definition of the short-circuit resistance and reactance 
values of the main elements forming a circuit allow the short 
circuit currents in the installation to be calculated.
With reference to Figure 2, with the method of reducing 
elements in series the following values are determined:
- the total short-circuit resistance value R = ∑ Ri
- the total short-circuit reactance value X = ∑ Xi
Once the two preceding parameters are known, it is possible 
to determine the total short-circuit direct impedance Z
Z =    (R 2 + X2)
Once the equivalent impedance seen from the fault point has 
been determined, one can proceed with the calculation of the 
symmetrical three-phase initial short-circuit current:
I”k3 = c Un /     3 Z
The three-phase short circuit is generally considered as the 
fault which causes the highest currents (except in particular 
conditions). In the absence of rotary machines, or when 
their action is diminished, it also represents the permanent 
short-circuit current and is the value taken as a reference to 
determine the breaking capacity of the protection device.
Calculation of the contribution of motors
In the event of a short circuit, the motor starts to function 
as a generator and powers the fault for a limited time 
corresponding to the time required to eliminate the 
energy that has been stored in the magnetic circuit of the 
motor. Through an electrical diagram of the motor with its 
subtransient reactance it is possible to calculate the numerical 
value of the motor contribution. 
In low voltage, the Standard IEC 60909-0 provides the 
minimum indications for which the phenomenon must be 
taken into account, it will be
∑IrM < 0.01 I”k
where:
∑IrM represents the sum of the rated currents of the motors 
connected directly to the network where the short circuit 
occurs. I” k is the initial three-phase short-circuit current 
determined without contribution of motors.
If it has to be taken into account, the impedance of the 
motors may be calculated using the formula:
where:
UrM is the rated voltage of the motor
IrM is the rated current of the motor
SrM is the rated apparent power of the motor 
(SrM = PrM/(ηrM cosj rM)
ILR/IrM is the ratio between the locked rotor current and the 
rated current of the motor.
The current I LR is often a value that is difficult to obtain an 
therefore it is common practice to consider this value as a 
multiple of the rated current of the motor. The typical values of 
the ratio I LR/IrM vary from 4 to 6.
Finally, for groups of low voltage motors connected via 
cables we can, with good approximation, use the relationship        
RM/XM = 0.42 with X M = 0.922 Z M.
1
ILR / IrM
1
ILR / IrM
UrM
 3 IrM
U
2
rM
SrM
ZM = . . =

70
[ms] 
[A] 
Ik
is
iu
0 10 20 30 50  50 60 70 80 90 100
R/X 
k 
a)
X/R 
k 
b)
Calculation of the peak current
The short circuit current I” k can be considered to consist of 
two components:
– a symmetrical component i s with sinusoidal wave form and 
in fact symmetrical in relation to the horizontal time axis. 
– a unidirectional component i u with exponential trend due to 
the presence of an inductive component. This component is 
characterized by a time constant τ = L/R (“R” indicates the 
resistance and “L” indicates the inductance of the circuit 
upstream of the failure point) and is extinguished after 3-6 
times τ
During the transitional period, the unidirectional component 
makes the short-circuit current asymmetric, characterized 
by a maximum value, referred to as the peak value, which 
is higher than what it would be with a purely sinusoidal 
magnitude. In general we can say that, considering the 
effective value of the symmetrical component of the short-
circuit current I k, the value of the first peak current may vary 
from 
   2 I” k to 2   2 I” k.
After the transitional period, the short-circuit current becomes 
practically symmetrical. An example of the current trend is 
shown in the following figure.
The Standard IEC 60909-0 provides useful indications for 
calculating the peak current. In particular, it indicates the 
following relationship: 
ip = k   2 I” k
where the value of k can be evaluated with the following 
approximate formula:
k = 1.02 + 0.98 .e
or through the following charts that show the value of “k” as a 
function of the parameter “R/X” or “X/R”
-3R
X
14. Example of substation design - 
electrical part
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.5 1 2 5 10  20 50 100 200
71
Sizing of the electrical installation and coordination of the 
protections 
Knowledge of certain parameters is fundamental for sizing the 
installation. For the calculations of the study and protection 
coordination it has been used and the software-design of ABB.
Distribution network data
We will start with an example of a letter of information 
supplied by the Distributor specifying the maximum levels of 
three-phase short-circuit and earth fault that could affect the 
installation:
Subject: Information about the Distributors power 
supply network for sizing of the equipment, calibration 
of protection devices, the design and verification of the 
earthing system regarding the supply:
Company: xxxxxxx – Substation xxxxxx - Street xxxxxxx 
– xxxxx
With reference to your request of xx.xx.xxxx please note 
that:
1)  your earthing system is compensated
2)  the substation in question is powered by the MV line 
“xxxxx” leaving from the Primary substation “xxxxx”;
3)  it has the following characteristics:
- Rated voltage: 20 kV ± 10%
– Rated frequency: 50 Hz ± 1% (95% of the year)
- Three-phase short-circuit current: 12.5 kA
– State of the neutral: compensated
- Single-phase earth fault current: 50 A
- Single-phase earth fault clearance time: 10 s
- Double earth fault clearance time: 
 < 0.2 s
– MV power supply characteristics: conforming to 
standard CEI EN 50160
It is worthwhile highlighting that the value of the single-
phase earth fault current and corresponding fault 
elimination time indicated above are subject to change 
following future development of the distribution network; 
therefore, in periodically checking your earthing system, 
you must take account of the new parameters provided 
in accordance with Standard CEI 0-16.
Development of the proposed example
Now we will develop the example proposed evaluating the 
main electrical parameters of the network and the choice of 
circuit-breakers and protections for proper operation of the 
system, in particular coordinating the protections.
Description of the characteristics of the installation (as 
specified in the letter from the Distributor).
Distribution network:
– rated voltage U nQ=20kV
– short circuit current I” kQ=12,5kA
20/0.4 kV substation transformers with the following data:
– rated power: S rT=400kV
– short circuit voltage: u kr%=4%
– primary rated current: I rT1 = 11.5 A
– secondary nominal current: I rT2 = 578.0 A
– plug-in current: I i = 12 I rT1 = 138 A
– insertion time constant T i = 0.25 s
Short-circuit current on the LV busbar side:
– Rated voltage: U rLV = 400 V
– Short-circuit current downstream of one of the two 
transformers I” kLV = IrT2 / ukr = 15 kA, corresponding to 
 I” kMV = 300 A
Department switchgear are connected to the low voltage 
switchgear using cables of differing lengths.
The simplified single line diagram of the installation being 
analysed is shown here.
In the letter we can then find some important data such as the 
rated voltage 20 kV and the three-phase short-circuit current 
12.5 kA; we know that it is a network with compensated neutral 
with a single-phase earth fault current of 50 A. 
LV busbar at 400 V 
ILV1 ILV2
L1 L2 L3
IGMT
IMV1 IMV2
L4 L5 L6
User room
At the connection point
To the department 
switchgear
MV busbar at 20 KV
Trafo outgoing MV 
circuit-breaker
Device 
Main MV
User
HV/LV 
transformer
Circuit-breaker 
Main LV
8
7
6
1 2 3
5
72
10000s
1000s
 100s
10s
1s
100ms
10ms
 100mA  1mA 10A 100A 1kA 10kA 100kA
 
 
2
3 
 
3
1
The installation on the MV side consists of an incoming 
line with a circuit-breaker unit and two transformer outputs 
equipped with circuit-breakers. The protections, since 
protection 67N is not required, are of the type REF601, 
version CEI 0-16. 
14. Example of substation design - 
electrical part
Time-current curve, Three-phase fault @ 20000V
In the graph below, in logarithmic scale, we find the following 
parameters that are required in order to establish the 
protection of the transformer: the insertion curve of the 400 
kVA transformer (1), its rated current (2) and the symmetric 
short-circuit current on the LV side referring to the primary for 
2 s (3) required for the thermal protection of the transformer 
(I”kMV x 2s).
73
10000s
1000s
 100s
10s
1s
100ms
10ms
 100mA  1mA 10A 100A 1kA 10kA 100kA
 2
 
 
 
3
4
1
Based on what we have already seen in the chapter on 
protection relays, the limits imposed by the standard apply, in 
this case:
I>> Phase overcurrent 
protection: second 
threshold 
≤ 250 A, overcurrent extinction 
time ≤ 500 ms 
I>>> Overcurrent protection 
phase: third threshold 
≤ 600 A, overcurrent extinction 
time ≤ 120 ms
Curve 4 refers to the maximum adjustable values on the protection in accordance with Standard CEI 0-16.
Time-current curve, Three-phase fault @ 20000V
Icc max=12.50kAIb=11.5A
74
10000s
1000s
 100s
10s
1s
100ms
10ms
 100mA  1mA 10A 100A 1kA 10kA 100kA
 
 
 
2
3 
 
3
1 5
 4
Icc max=12.50kAIb=11.5A
Now we look at the low voltage; the characteristics of the 
main LV circuit-breakers must be chosen so that they will be 
selective with the relays of the switches of the sub-switchgear 
A, B, C, D, but, at the same time, protect the transformer 
against overload, recalling that the secondary current 
IrT2 = 578 A.
Taking into account the tolerances specified by Standard 
CEI 60947-1, we can considered certain tripping at a value 
greater than 1.2 times the value set (and certain non-tripping 
at a value less than 1.05 the value set). 
Time-current curve, Three-phase fault @ 20000V
14. Example of substation design - 
electrical part
Choosing an Emax new X1B 630 air circuit-breaker as the 
circuit-breaker, equipped with PR332 LSIG electronic relay, 
In = 630 A, with setting of the curve L to 0.96, we obtain a 
current setting of 605 A, which related to the primary equals 
12.1 A. The tolerance will therefore range from 12.7 A (1.05 I r) 
to 14.5 (1.2 I r). Therefore the curve S, I 2t=cost, was selected 
with setting of 1.8 In = 1134 A equivalent to 23 A and time 
0.06 s in order to obtain chronometric selectivity. Finally, the 
instantaneous trip will occur at 15 In = 9450 A equivalent on 
the primary to 189 A with a nominal tripping time of 10 ms. 
The curve (5) is illustrated below with the respective 
tolerances.
75
10000s
1000s
 100s
10s
1s
100ms
10ms
 100mA  1mA 10A 100A 1kA 10kA 100kA
 6
 
 
2
3 
  
3
1 5
 4
Icc max=12.50kAIb=11.5A
The use of PR221 electronic relays on all the Tmax circuit-
beakers of the main LV switchgear in any case guarantees 
the selectivity of the main LV circuit-breakers with all the 
outgoing connections to the department switchgear. The 
following graph shows the curve for the most critical outgoing 
connection to department A (6).
Time-current curve, Three-phase fault @ 20000V
76
10000s
1000s
 100s
10s
1s
100ms
10ms
 100mA  1mA 10A 100A 1kA 10kA 100kA
 7
 
 
2
3 
  
3
1 5
 4
Icc max=12.50kAIb=11.5A
Now we move on to the setting of the overcurrent relay for 
the 20 kV startup circuit-breaker to the 400 kVA transformer. 
The most important condition to be met is the protection 
of the transformer against short circuits, while the overload 
protection can be delegated to the low voltage circuit breaker. 
It must also protect the transformer against faults on the 
low voltage riser upstream of the circuit breaker, but it must 
not trip due to the inrush current of the transformer. Finally 
it must be selective with the main MV circuit breaker, which 
must in turn meet the requirements of the Distributor and the 
standard, and with the low voltage circuit breakers.
As we know, the first overcurrent threshold I> is optional and 
in this example it is difficult to implement selectivity with the 
LV circuit breaker. Therefore we will use a protection with two 
independent time thresholds I>> and I>>>. The protection 
must meet the following requirements:
– first threshold disabled
– the setting of the second threshold must be higher than the 
regulated current of the second threshold S of the LV circuit 
breaker that in relation to the primary is 23 A. Applying the 
tolerance we get 27.6 A. 
– e selective in general with the LV circuit breakers
– must trip in less than 2 s on the short-circuit current     
I”kMV= 300 A (held on the short circuit of the transformer)
14. Example of substation design - 
electrical part
Time-Current Curve, Three-phase fault @ 20000V
– the time must in any case be less than the value of 0.5 s set 
for the second threshold, 
– have the setting of the third threshold greater than the short-
circuit current due to a fault in LV. In this regard, the standard 
recommends adopting, for protection devices installed at the 
two ends of a non-negligible impedance circuit, such as the 
transformers, a coefficient α  by which to multiply the initial 
short circuit current in order to obtain selectivity between the 
two devices upstream and downstream. The coefficient takes 
into account the asymmetry of the current and varies for 
the transformers from 1.2 for 50 kVA transformers to 1.6 for 
2500 kVA transformers. 
 Therefore we need to set the second threshold to a value 
greater than 1.4 I” kMV =  1.4 • 300 = 420 A. 
– and lastly, it must be less than the set value of 600 A and 
with a time less than 0.12 s.
We therefore obtain the curve (7) where:
I> disabled
I>> = 120 A, t>> = 0.3 s
I>>> = 416 A, t>>> = 0.05 s
77
10000s
1000s
 100s
10s
1s
100ms
10ms
 100mA  1mA 10A 100A 1kA 10kA 100kA
 3 3
 4
 7
 2
 1
 8
Icc max=12.50kAIb=11.5A
Only the relay of the general device DG still needs to be set. 
The setting must meet the following requirements:
– comply with the limits set 
– be selective with the protections of the two circuit-breakers 
protecting the transformers
– protect the section between the delivery point and the 
transformers 
Since this is the last step of selectivity required, we get 
the two current settings to match the specifications of the 
standard, in other words 250 A for the second threshold and 
600 A for the third (the first is always disabled). 
As regards timing, we will select 0.4 s for the second 
threshold and 0.05 s for the third (8).
Time-Current Curve, Three-phase fault @ 20000V
78
10000s
1000s
 100s
10s
1s
100ms
10ms
 100mA  1mA 10A 100A 1kA 10kA 100kA
L3L3
I”k2
L2L2
L1L1
 7
 
 
2
3  
 
31
5
 4
 6
 8
Ib=11.5A Icc max=12.50kA
It can be noted that, having already selected an instantaneous 
value of 0.05 s as the tripping time for the MV transformer 
protection (7) for the third threshold, it is not possible to 
obtain selectivity over the whole range of short-circuit 
currents. Above 600 A, therefore, both the circuit-breakers 
of the transformers and the DG will trip. However we can 
14. Example of substation design - 
electrical part
Time-Current Curve, Three-phase fault @ 20000V
note that the selectivity covers the entire field of short circuit 
currents in low voltage (600 A in relation to the primary) and 
we will still have selectivity for faults in MV up to the third 
protection threshold of the DG. The chart below provides a 
general summary of the coordination study:
We will now check the coordination of the earth fault 
protections.
In the case of a transformer with a delta-star connection with 
earthed neutral, a phase-earth fault on the secondary side 
gives rise to a line current on the primary side that is equal to 
1/√3 = 0.577 times the three-phase fault (I” k2). 
Consequently the setting of the first or second current 
threshold of the relay on the MV side should be < 0.577 I” k2.
In our case, we have I” kLV = 15 kA corresponding to I” kMV = 
300 A on the primary and therefore 300 x 0.577 = 173 A. The 
fault current is therefore higher than the threshold of 120 A set 
for the MV protection of the transformer (curve 7) which will trip 
for earth fault currents on the LV side greater than:
120 x (20000/400) / 0.577 = 10397 A
0.577x(U 2/U1)x I” k2
0.577x(U 2/U1)x I” k2
79
10000s
1000s
 100s
10s
1s
100ms
10ms
 100mA  1mA 10A 100A 1kA 10kA 100kA
 
 
B
3 
 
C
A
Io> Homopolar overcurrent 
protection  
first threshold (for networks 
with compensated neutral)
≤ 2 A, fault extinction time 
≤ 450 ms
Io>> Homopolar overcurrent 
protection  
second threshold (for networks 
with compensated neutral)
≤ 70 A (140% of the single-
phase earth fault current 
communicated by the Distributor 
= 50 A); fault extinction time: 
≤ 170 ms
The limits set are highlighted in curve (A).
Then we set the first threshold I o> on the required current of 
2A with the lowest time allowed by the REF601 protection 
for the first threshold, in other words 0.1 s. The second 
threshold I o>> will once again be set to the limit required by 
the Standard of 70 A (50 x 1.4) and with an instantaneous set 
to 0.05 s (curve B).
Finally, we set the protection of the DG so that it is, if 
possible, selective with that of the transformer. Therefore 
we leave the two current settings at the values set by the 
Distributor (2 A and 70 A) and we set the time of the first 
threshold to the maximum allowed value (0.45 s) less the 
tripping time of the circuit-breakers, let's say 0.35 s. Lastly 
we set the second threshold again to the set value of 70 A 
and with tripping time set again to the instantaneous value of 
0.05 s (curve C).  Selectivity on the second threshold is not 
guaranteed, but the protections are in any case selective up 
to the fault current value provided by the Distributor.
As regards, instead, the earth fault on the transformer and 
on the medium voltage riser, the protection will not only have 
protect the transformer but also respect the limits imposed 
by the Distributor and by the standard. In our example, the 
Information letter from the Distributor said:
– Single-phase earth fault current: 50 A
– Single-phase earth fault clearance time: 10 s
– Double earth fault clearance time: < 0.2 s
In addition, standard CEI 0-16 requires the following for 
networks with compensated neutral:
Time-Current Curve, Phase to earth fault @ 20000V
80
500 50050027 27
2000
15. Conclusion of the example and 
selection of the switchgear: the ABB 
offer
500 50050027 27
2000
For the example given, we can summarize the choices made 
and define the necessary switchgear.
Medium voltage switchgear:
– The installation on the MV side, downstream of the 
delivery point, will be implemented using an ABB UniSec 
switchgear. The switchgear consists of 1 Incoming line with 
HBC Unit and HySec multifunction device + 2 transformer 
startups with HBC units equipped with HySec multifunction 
devices.
– Since the protection 67N is not required, the protections are 
of the type REF601.
– The DG unit is equipped with KECA 250 B1 approved 
current sensors and a 100 A toroidal CT TO11S3.
– The transformer starting units are equipped with a 30A CT 
and 100 A toroidal CT TO11S3.
In particular, we will have the following series of components:
HBC CEI 0-16 Incoming Unit
– Presence of voltage on the cable side. 
– HySec p230 multifunction switchgear consisting of:
 - Vacuum circuit-breaker without motorization and with 
opening release, closing release, operation counter, and 
auxiliary contacts 6NO + 6NC;
 - Disconnector in SF 6 with: 
  - 1 removable key with feeder disconnector in closed 
position and 1 removable key in the open position;
  - 1 removable key with earthing switch in closed position 
and 1 removable key in the open position.
 - Earthing switch on the distributor side with a key that 
is the responsibility of the distributor, according to the 
Standard CEI 0-16. 
– Protection relay REF 601 with Data Logger, Modbus 
communication RS 485 serial output (51, I>; 51, I>>; 50, 
I>>>; 51N, I o>; 50N, I o>>, 68) with 3 current sensors and 
toroid for earth fault, conforming to S tandard CEI 0-16.
Transformer starting unit  
– Presence of voltage on the cable side. 
– HySec p230 multifunction switchgear consisting of:
 - Vacuum circuit-breaker without motorization and with 
opening release, closing release, auxiliary contacts 6NO + 
6NC and , operation counter;
 - Disconnector in SF 6 with: 
 -  1 removable key with feeder disconnector in closed 
position and 1 removable key in the open position;
 -  1 removable key with earthing switch in closed position 
and 1 removable key in the open position. 
– Protection relay REF 601 without communication (51, I>; 51, 
I>>; 50, I>>>; 51N, I o>; 50N, Io>>, 68) current sensors and 
toroid for earth fault, conforming to the IEC Standard.
81
-BCR -BCR -BCR
-BCN -BCN -BCN
-BAD -BAD -BAD
-PFV1 -PFV1 -PFV1
3 3 3
5 11 176 12 181 7 132 8 14
-BCS -BCS -BCS
-QAB -QAB -QAB
-QBD -QBD -QBD
-BCR -BCR -BCR
-BCN -BCN -BCN
-BAD -BAD -BAD
-PFV1 -PFV1 -PFV1
3 3 3
5 11 176 12 181 7 132 8 14
-BCS -BCS -BCS
-QAB -QAB -QAB
-QBD -QBD -QBD
Overall dimensions (HxLxP) [mm]: 2000x1554x1248; 
the wiring diagram of the switchgear is shown below.
For venting of gases resulting from an internal arc fault, the 
most technically appropriate solution to prevent the escape 
of hot gases and the creation of overpressures inside the 
substation is to require release to the outside of the room. 
In this case a suitable gas exhaust duct must be provided, 
paying attention to accessibility by persons to the gas exit 
zone and protecting the end of the duct so as to prevent 
water, dust, small animals and foreign bodies from getting in. 
A less expensive option is to request the switchgear with units 
with filters for withstanding the arc. In this case, the gases 
are conveyed into the filter, which cools them and lowers 
the pressure before they are released into the room. In the 
example shown the second solution was selected. 
82
Transformers
Two 400 kVA MV/LV 20/0.4 kV dry transformers with windings encased in resin, type ABB hi-T Plus, primary delta (∆ ) winding 
and secondary earthed start winding (  ). Class F1 class in order to reduce the fire risk. 
15. Conclusion of the example and 
selection of the switchgear: the ABB 
offer
Guaranteed values
Reference standards IEC 60076, EN 50541-1 EU Regulation
548/2014 – Eco Design
No-load losses, Po [W] 750 (+ 0 Tol.)
No-load losses, Pk at 75 °C [W] 4840 (+ 0 Tol.) 
No-load losses, Pk at 120 °C [W] 5500 (+ 0 Tol.)
Sound power level Lwa [dB] 60
Preliminary values IP00
Length (Approx.) [mm] 1546
Width  (Approx.) [mm] 826
Height  (Approx.) [mm] 1565
Wheel base (Approx.) [mm] 670x670
Diameter of wheels (Approx.) [mm] 125
Total weight [kg] 1680
83
1931
14 14720 720
637
100
TESTTEST TEST
TESTTESTTEST
TESTTEST TEST
TESTTESTTEST
Low voltage switchgear
ABB low voltage switchgear, type ArTù K, IP65, equipped with the following circuit-breakers:
2  air circuit-breakers, Emax new series, type X1B 630 with release PR332/P LSIG In=630 A
4  moulded-case circuit-breakers, Tmax series, type T4N 250 with release PR221DS-LS/I In=250 A
2  moulded-case circuit-breakers, Tmax series, type T2N 160 with release PR221DS-LS In=250 A
Overall dimensions (HxLxP) [mm]: 2031x1468x637
With these switchgear the space required for the User room of the substation is now well defined.
84
5000
2460
4000
Prefabricated substation
To conclude the example, to avoid any structural problem or 
failure to comply with laws and regulations, we will assume 
that a prefabricated substation is chosen.
This type that will contain the switchgear consists of two 
modules, one containing the metering room and the User room 
with the UniSec MV switchgear and the ArTù K LV switchgear. 
The second module containing the two MV/LV transformers 
placed in separate room and with independent access, in 
order to be able to carry out separate maintenance on one 
without de-energizing the other.
The foundation is also prefabricated in such a way that the 
interspace created between the bottom of the foundation 
and the floor of the substation can be used for laying MV/LV 
cables, avoiding the design and construction of a foundation 
built on site complete with conduits.
The two modules finally be coupled to a monobloc with 
the Distributor room that complies with the technical 
specifications of the Distributor.
15. Conclusion of the example and 
selection of the switchgear: the ABB 
offer
Metering room
User room
MV switchboard
UniSec
Switchgear
ArTù K
User room 
Trafo 1
User room 
Trafo 2
85
ABB S.p.A. 
Power Products Division
Unità Operativa Sace-MV
Via Friuli, 4
I-24044 Dalmine
Tel.: +39 035 6952 111
Fax: +39 035 6952 874
e-mail: info.mv@it.abb.com
www.abb.com 
Data and illustrations are not binding. We reserve 
the right to modify the contents of this document 
without prior notice following technical and product 
developments. 
© Copyright 2015 ABB. All rights reserved.
Contacts
1VCP000591 - Rev - EN - 2015 11 - (Brochure GuidE MV/LV transformer substations) (gs)
